1
MSA-Pakistan
CONSTITUTION & BYLAWS
2025-26 Edition
Amended on 6th September 2025 2nd NGA Shifa College of Medicine Islamabad

2

TABLE OF CONTENTS

CONSTITUTION

1. NAME AND SEAT

5

2. NATURE

5

3. PRINCIPLES

5

4. MISSION AND OBJECTIVES

5

Mission:

5

Vision:

5

Objectives:

5

5. MEMBERSHIP ELIGIBILITY AND LEADERSHIP CRITERIA

5

6. NATIONAL GENERAL ASSEMBLY (NGA)

6

7. EXECUTIVE BOARD AND TEAM OF OFFICIALS (EBTOS)

6

8. SUPERVISING COUNCIL

7

9. STANDING COMMITTEES, SUPPORT DIVISIONS, WORKING GROUPS AND TASK FORCES

7

10. FINANCE

7

11. AMENDMENTS

7

BYLAWS

1. NAME

8

2. NATURE

8

3. LANGUAGE

8

4. MISSION AND OBJECTIVES

8

5. INTERPRETATIONS AND DEFINITIONS

8

6. MEMBERS

10

6.23. Termination of Membership

11

6.24. MSA-Pakistan General Members

12

6.25. Honorary MSA-Pakistan Lifetime Membership

12

7. LOCAL COUNCILS & COORDINATOR INSTITUTES

12

7.1. General

12

7.2. Change of LC/CI Status

13

7.2.1. Coordinator Institute to Candidate LC

13

7.2.2. Candidate LC to Temporary LC

13

7.2.3. Temporary LC to Permanent LC

13

7.3. Change of Status Guidelines

13

7.4. Procedure for Change of Status

14

7.6. Local Council EBTO Selection

14

7.7. LC Presidents & Coordinators

15

7.8. LC Calendar of Events:

15

8. NATIONAL MEETINGS

15

8.1. National General Assembly (NGA)

15

8.2. Special General Assembly (SGA)

16

8.3. Plenary Team

16

8.4. Motion and Debate

17

8.5. Point of Order (POO)

18

8.6. Point of Information (POI)

18

3

8.7. Voting

18

8.8. Sub-Regional Trainings

19

8.9. Presidents' Session



19

9. OFFICIALS

19

9.1. MSA-Pakistan Executive Board (EB) and Team of Officials (TO)

19

9.3. Supervising Council (SupCo)

20

9.4. National Assistants

20

10. STANDING COMMITTEES

20

11. DUTIES OF THE EXECUTIVE BOARD

21

11.1. General Duties:

21

11.2. President:

22

11.3. Vice-President for Internal Affairs (VPI)

22

11.4. Vice-President for External Affairs (VPE)

23

11.5. Vice-President for Activities (VPA)

23

11.6. Vice-President for Capacity Building (VPCB)

24

11.7. Vice-President for Members (also serving as Secretary General)

24

11.8. Vice-President for Finances (VPF)

24

11.9. Vice-President for Public Relations & Communication (VPPRC)

25

11.10. Suspension, removal and resignation of Officials

25

11.11. Procedure for termination of Officials

25

11.12. Procedure for resignation of Officials

26

11.13. Procedure for Vote of No Confidence (VoNC)

26

11.14. Replacement of vacant MSA-Pakistan Official positions

26

12. DUTIES OF THE TEAM OF OFFICIALS

26

12.1. Standing Committees

26

12.2. Duties of the National Officers (NPO, NORA, NORP, NOME, NORE, NEO)

27

13. ELECTIONS

28

13.3. Eligibility criteria for candidates for MSA-Pakistan President:

28

13.8. Eligibility criteria for candidates for all MSA-Pakistan Team of Officials

(NORA, NPO, NORP, NOME, NEO, and NORE)

29

13.9. Voting

29

14. PUBLIC RELATIONS & COMMUNICATION

30

14.1. Corporate Identity

30

14.2. Publications

30

14.3. Online Communication Channels

30

15. FINANCES

30

15.1. Generel

30

15.2. Budget Approval Procedure

31

15.3. Reporting Procedure

31

15.4. Transaction and Withdrawal Procedure

31

15.5. Sponsorships

31

16. ACTIVITIES

32

17. constitution & bylaws & AMENDMENTS TO THE constitution & bylaws

32

17.2. Bylaw Change Proposals (BCPs)

32

17.3. Suspension of constitution & bylaws

33

17.4. Other Regulations

33

4

18. ALUMNI & ALUMNI COUNCIL

33

19. DISSOLUTION

33

ANNEX 1

35

ANNEX 2

36

2.5 Maintenance of voting rights of an institute:

37

2.7 Maintenance of status for a Coordinator Institute (CI):

37

2.8 Mandatory conditions to achieve status of a Candidate LC from a Coordinator Institute:

37

2.9 Coordinator's team:

37

2.11 COORDINATOR'S TOOLKIT FOR COORDINATOR INSTITUTES

37

3. Procedure for MSA-Pakistan EBTO Elections

42

3.2.5. The Oath

42

ANNEX 4

43

ANNEX 5

43

ANNEX 6

44

ANNEX 7

45

5

CONSTITUTION

1. NAME AND SEAT 1.1. The official name of the organization shall be `Medical Students' Association of Pakistan', hereafter also referred to as `The Association'. 1.2. The official abbreviation shall be `MSA-Pakistan. 1.3. The Association is established in Lahore, Punjab, The Province of Pakistan.
2. NATURE 2.1. The Association is an independent organization representing medical, dental, pharmacy, physiotherapy, nursing, and allied health students in Pakistan, serving both local and global communities. 2.2. The Association shall operate as a not-for-profit organization dedicated to advocating for the interests of medical, dental, pharmacy, physiotherapy, nursing, and allied health students.
3. PRINCIPLES 3.1. The Association pursues its aims without discrimination based on political affiliation, religion, social background, race, nationality, gender, or any other factor. 3.2. The Association fosters humanitarian values among medical students, aiming to shape them into responsible future healthcare professionals. 3.3. The Association upholds and respects the independence of its members.
4. MISSION AND OBJECTIVES
Mission: 4.1. An organization that unites medical, dental, ,
pharmacy, physiotherapy, nursing, and allied health students nationwide to enhance youth involvement in the health system, including--but not limited to--public health, global health, sexual and reproductive health, human rights, medical education, and research, while also providing opportunities for participation in exchange programs both nationally and internationally.
Vision: 4.2. To create a unified platform for future healthcare
professionals, fostering excellence in medical education, advocacy, and global collaborations

to advance societal well-being and sustainable healthcare.

4.3. 4.4.
4.5.
4.6. 4.7. 4.8.
4.9. 4.10.

Objectives:

To empower medical, dental, pharmacy,

physiotherapy, nursing, and allied health

students to leverage their knowledge and skills

in advancing the well-being and welfare of

society

To promote and facilitate research, professional,

and scientific exchanges, as well as activities and

extracurricular training for medical, dental, and

allied health students, thereby increasing their

awareness of different cultures, societies, and

related health issues.

To provide a forum for medical, dental,

pharmacy, physiotherapy, nursing, and allied

health students nationwide to discuss issues

related to individual and community health,

global health, medical education, and science,

and to develop policy statements based on

these discussions

To serve as an association for the

communication and representation of Pakistani

medical, dental, pharmacy, physiotherapy,

nursing, and allied health students at both

national and international levels.

To provide a link between general members and

international

organizations,

fostering

cooperation and networking among them.

To promote awareness among students

regarding their professional skills and the

importance of quality education in the medical,

dental, physiotherapy, pharmacy, nursing, and

allied health disciplines within both the public

and private sectors in Pakistan.

To support government efforts in providing

better healthcare at all levels.

To ensure a unified and informed voice on issues

concerning the members and the objectives of

the Association.

5. MEMBERSHIP ELIGIBILITY AND LEADERSHIP CRITERIA
5.1. Medical students (MBBS), dental students (BDS), physiotherapy students (DPT), nursing Students (BSN), pharmacy(PharmD) and allied health students who have graduated within a year are eligible to become members of MSA-Pakistan.

6

5.2. Eligibility to compete for Executive Board (EB) & Team of Officials (TO) positions within the hierarchy of MSA-Pakistan is limited to medical students (MBBS) and dental students (BDS). It is hereby noted that dental students shall not be eligible to contest for the office of President of MSA-Pakistan.
5.3. Physiotherapy, nursing, pharmacy, and allied health students can become members of MSA-Pakistan and participate in local and national opportunities; however, they are not eligible for leadership positions within MSA-Pakistan, including the local council and national cabinet.
6. NATIONAL GENERAL ASSEMBLY (NGA) 6.1. The National General Assembly (NGA) is the annual conference of MSA-Pakistan, which includes plenary sessions, standing committee meetings, workshops, and elections for new Executive Board Team Officials (EBTOs). 6.2. The NGA serves as the highest authority and decision-making body of the Association. 6.3. The NGA shall meet at least once a year , NGA meeting shall commence within a window from 20th of July to 20th of August. 6.4. The bodies with voting rights at MSA-Pakistan plenaries are the Permanent and Temporary Local Councils. 6.5. Official invitations for NGA meetings must be sent to all members and Local Councils via email and through all MSA-Pakistan social media channels at least two months in advance, by the Executive Board. 6.6. Any candidacy submitted to the NGA after the designated deadline will be considered invalid. If no applications are received for an Executive Board position by the original deadline, submissions will be accepted up to two days before the elections and will be deemed valid. In this context, 'valid' means legally or officially acceptable.
7. EXECUTIVE BOARD AND TEAM OF OFFICIALS (EBTOS)
7.1. MSA-Pakistan shall be managed by the Executive Board and Team of Officials. The Executive Board of the Association is composed of eight (8) positions. The National General Assembly votes the EB members as (1 each): a. President b. Vice-President for Internal Affairs (VPI) c. Vice-President for External Affairs (VPE) d. Vice-President for Activities (VPA)

e. Vice-President for Capacity Building (VPCB)
f. Vice-President for Members (VPM) g. Vice-President for Finances (VPF) h. Vice-President for Public Relations &
Communication 7.2. The Executive Board and the Team of Officials
are elected for a period of one (1) year. 7.3. The term of an EBTO member can be extended
to not beyond 2 months, in case the position remains vacant. 7.4. The Team of Officials is composed of six (6) positions. The National General Assembly also votes on the Team of Officials consisting of: a. National Public Health Officer (NPO)
(SCOPH) b. National Officer on Human Rights and
Peace (NORP) (SCORP) c. National Officer on Sexual and
Reproductive Health and Rights including HIV & AIDS (NORA) (SCORA) d. National Officer on Medical Education (NOME) (SCOME) e. National Officer on Research Exchange (NORE) (SCORE) f. National Exchange Officer (NEO) (SCOPE) 7.5. The Executive Board and the Team of Officials are entitled to officially represent the Association. 7.6. The term of office of all the EBTO members runs from October 1st until September 30th of the next year. 7.7. Any EBTO will cease to hold office a. At the end of their term b. By a written resignation with a two-weeks notice c. By their death d. By removal from office by court in cases provided for in law e. By removal from office as described under bylaws § 11.10 f. By removal from office through a no confidence motion

7.8. 7.8.1.
7.8.2.

Executive Board Meeting The Executive Board (EB) shall meet at least once every two months to discuss ongoing organizational matters, review financial updates, and monitor committee activities. The President shall chair EB meetings, with the Vice-President for Internal Affairs (VPI) acting as the deputy chair.

7

7.8.3. 7.8.4.

Meeting minutes must be documented and circulated among EB members within one week of the meeting. A quorum for EB meetings shall consist of 50% of its members.

8. SUPERVISING COUNCIL 8.1. The Supervising Council provides oversight and guidance to the Executive Board (EB) and other officials of MSA-Pakistan. 8.2. The Supervising Council is composed of at least two (2) and a maximum of three (3) members. 8.3. Supervising Council members shall not hold any other official position within MSA-Pakistan. 8.4. The Supervisory Council has the power to overrule decisions of the EBTO for important reasons as described in bylaws § 11.8.15 8.5. Any Supervising Council member will cease to hold office g. At the end of their term h. By a written resignation with a two-weeks notice i. By their death j. By removal from office by court in cases provided for in law k. By removal from office through a no confidence motion

9. STANDING COMMITTEES, SUPPORT DIVISIONS, WORKING GROUPS AND TASK FORCES
9.1. The National General Assembly (NGA) may propose and establish Standing Committees and Support Divisions to execute, coordinate, and support the activities of the Association.
9.2. A member of the National Cabinet, elected during the NGA, will coordinate the work of these bodies.
9.3. To address areas of concern within the Association, Task Forces may also be proposed at the NGA.
9.4. Throughout the term, the National Cabinet may form National Working Groups (NWGs) and National Small Working Groups (SWGs) to execute, coordinate, and support the Association's activities.
9.5. The activities of these working groups (NWGs and SWGs) will be supervised by a National

Cabinet member, who is mutually appointed based on motivation submitted during the application process, and coordinated by a member who applies specifically for the Coordinator position.
10. FINANCE 10.1. The income of the Association is composed of but not limited membership fees submitted by new members, any donations received from govt or non govt organizations. 10.2. The financial year of the Association runs from 1st October up to and including 30th September of the next year. 10.3. Annually, the EB shall submit a report at the yearly meeting of the NGA about the developments and the pursued policy in the Association. It submits the accounts and the statements of assets and liabilities to the NGA. All members of the Executive Board shall sign these documents; if the signature of one or more of them is lacking, this shall be disclosed, stating the reasons thereof. 10.4. All bank receipts considered in all financial matters of MSA-Pakistan shall be emailed to VPF at vpf@msapakistan.org and Cc'd to president@msapakistan.org 10.5. Submission at the NGA of the documents as referred to in this paragraph, discharges the EB for its management, unless the NGA makes a reservation. 10.6. The EB is responsible for all financial actions of the Association.
11. AMENDMENTS 11.1. Amendments to the Constitution have to be decided upon by the NGA by a two third majority at a meeting in which at least one third of the LCs with voting rights are present or represented. 11.2. To regulate matters not described in this Constitution, the Association has Bylaws. The Bylaws have to comply with this Constitution. 11.3. Amendments and changes to the Bylaws have to be decided upon by the National General Assembly as explained under "constitution & bylaws & AMENDMENTS TO THE constitution & bylaws" in the MSA-Pakistan bylaw

8

BYLAWS

1. NAME 1.1. The official name of the organization shall be
`Medical Students' Association of Pakistan', hereafter also referred to as `The Association'. 1.2. The official abbreviation shall be `MSA-Pakistan. 1.3. The Association is established in Lahore, Punjab Province of Pakistan.

2. NATURE

2.1. The Association is an independent Association of

Local Councils representing different medical,

dental,

and

Allied

health

colleges/schools/universities/institutes

3. LANGUAGE 3.1. The official language of MSA-Pakistan is English
(UK) and Urdu (PAK).

4. MISSION AND OBJECTIVES
Mission: 4.1. An organization that unites medical, dental, ,
pharmacy, physiotherapy, nursing, and allied health students nationwide to enhance youth involvement in the health system, including--but not limited to--public health, global health, sexual and reproductive health, human rights, medical education, and research, while also providing opportunities for participation in exchange programs both nationally and internationally.

Vision: 4.2. To create a unified platform for future healthcare
professionals, fostering excellence in medical education, advocacy, and global collaborations to advance societal well-being and sustainable healthcare.

Objectives: 4.3. To empower medical, dental, pharmacy,
physiotherapy, nursing, and allied health students to leverage their knowledge and skills in advancing the well-being and welfare of society 4.4. To promote and facilitate research, professional, and scientific exchanges, as well as activities and extracurricular training for medical, dental, and allied health students, thereby increasing their awareness of different cultures, societies, and related health issues. 4.5. To provide a forum for medical, dental, pharmacy, physiotherapy, nursing, and allied health students

nationwide to discuss issues related to individual and community health, global health, medical education, and science, and to develop policy statements based on these discussions 4.6. To serve as an association for the communication and representation of Pakistani medical, dental, pharmacy, physiotherapy, nursing, and allied health students at both national and international levels. 4.7. To provide a link between general members and international organizations, fostering cooperation and networking among them. 4.8. To promote awareness among students regarding their professional skills and the importance of quality education in the medical, dental, physiotherapy, pharmacy, nursing, and allied health disciplines within both the public and private sectors in Pakistan. 4.9. To support government efforts in providing better healthcare at all levels. 4.10. To ensure a unified and informed voice on issues concerning the members and the objectives of the Association.
5. INTERPRETATIONS AND DEFINITIONS 5.1. The following words and expressions used in these
constitution & bylaws shall have the respective meanings assigned to them hereinafter. 5.2. Medical student, a student-in-training to become an MBBS(5 Years) Doctor and enrolled in a medical college/school/university/institute recognized by HEC and PMDC, or within 12 months of declaration of Final year result by the university. 5.3. Dental student, a student-in-training to become an BDS Doctor and enrolled in a dental college/school/university/institute recognized by HEC and PMDC, or within 12 months of declaration of Final year result by the university 5.4. Pharmacy student, a student-in-training to become an Pharmacist and enrolled in college/school/university/institute recognized by HEC and Pharmacy Council of Pakistan, or within 12 months of declaration of Final year result by the university 5.5. Physiotherapy student, a student-in-training to become an Physiotherapist and enrolled in a college/school/university/institute recognized by HEC and relevant accreditation authority, or within 12 months of declaration of Final year result by the university 5.6. Nursing student, a student-in-training to become a Nurse and enrolled in a Nursing

9

college/school/university/institute recognized by

HEC and PNMC, or within 12 months of declaration

of Final year result by the university

5.7. Allied health student, is one who is currently

enrolled in a program at an accredited college,

university, or institute recognized by the Higher

Education Commission (HEC) and the relevant

professional council or authority, or within 12

months of the declaration of the final year result by

the university. Allied health students are pursuing

education and training in a field related to

healthcare but not classified as a physician, nurse, or

dentist. Allied health professionals work

collaboratively with these primary care providers to

deliver comprehensive healthcare services.

5.8. 'Member' means an individual who has been

granted membership in MSA-Pakistan..

5.9. `Local Council' or `LC' means an institute officially

represented within MSA-Pakistan which has more

than 30 members, a functional cabinet and an NOC

from their institute's head/ principal/ VC/ relevant

authority.

5.10. `Coordinator Institute' or `CI' means an institute

officially represented within MSA-Pakistan which

has not yet gained 30 members, an NOC from their

institute's head, and has not and has not formed a

cabinet.

5.11. 'Executive Board' or 'EB' refers to the governing

body of MSA-Pakistan, comprising the president,

Vice Presidents for Internal Affairs, External Affairs,

Activities, Capacity Building, Finances, Public

Relations & Communication. as described in bylaws

§ 9.1.1.

5.12. 'Executive Board and Team of Officials' or 'EBTO'

refers to The President, Vice Presidents and National

Officers.

5.13. 'Standing Committees' means the working bodies

of the organization which have particular aims and

objectives to help achieve the objectives of the

organization as described in bylaws § 10.

5.14. 'Team of Officials' or 'TO' means the MSA-Pakistan

Standing Committee National Officers as described

in bylaws § 9.1.4.

5.15. 'Cabinet' means the EB, the TOs and Team

members of respective national and local teams.

5.16. 'EBTO Meeting' or `EBTOM' means the meetings of

the MSA-Pakistan Executive Board and the Team of

Officials..

5.17. 'Official' or 'MSA-Pakistan Official' or 'MSA-Pakistan

Officer' means any of the following:

a)

Any member of the Executive Board

b)

Any member of the Team of Officials

c)

Any appointed National Assistants of

the MSA-Pakistan EBTO

d)

Any member of the MSA-Pakistan

Supervising Council

5.18. `Supervising Council' a council comprising at least

two (2) and a maximum of three (3)members who

guide and supervise the working of the Executive

Board and Team of Officials and are elected by them

at the NGA.

5.19. `Regions' According to the Constitution of the

Islamic Republic of Pakistan-1973, the AJK Interim

Constitution-1974, and the Gilgit Baltistan

Order-2018, the 'Regions' in MSA-Pakistan are

delineated as:

a) Punjab (Pb)

b) Sindh (sn)

c) Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KPK)

d) Balochistan (Bn)

e) Islamabad Capital territory (ICT)

f) Azad Jammu and Kashmir (AJK)

g) Gilgit-Baltistan (GB)

5.20. `OLMs' or 'Online Meetings' are teleconference

meetings held by MSA-Pakistan Officials by giving

sufficient prior notice and the minutes of these

meetings are recorded.

5.21. `NGA' or National General Assembly) is the annual

conference of MSA-Pakistan and comprises plenary

sessions, standing committee sessions, workshops,

and elections of the new EBTO officials.

5.22. `Plenary' is an official meeting where a quorum

should be present to vote upon important decisions

such as bylaw changes, procedural motions,

adopting policies and electing the new EBTO.

5.23. `Quorum' is defined as the minimum number of

members of the voting body that must be present

at any of its meetings to make the proceedings of

that meeting valid.

5.24. A 'direct negative' is a plenary procedure where a

member of the voting body proposes an alternative

motion in response to an original motion. By

proposing a direct negative, the member is

effectively voting against the original motion and

putting forth their own alternative proposal.

5.25. An 'alternative motion' is a plenary procedure

where a member of the voting body proposes a

different motion in response to an original motion

that has been put forward. The alternative motion

serves as a substitute for the original, offering a

different course of action or decision.

5.26. When an alternative motion is proposed, the

members must choose between the original motion

and the alternative motion. If the alternative motion

is approved, it replaces the original motion and

becomes the primary motion that is then

considered and voted on. If the alternative motion is

defeated, the original motion remains in play.

10

5.27. If the direct negative motion is approved, it will substitute and replace the original motion. However, if the direct negative is defeated, then the original motion will stand and be the one that is followed or acted upon
5.28. A `National Working Group' or NWG is a group of individuals, led by national coordinator(s), that work together on a specific goal for a defined period of time to achieve certain outcomes.
5.29. A National Coordinator(s) are the leaders or heads of the National Working Group (NWG). They are responsible for guiding & coordinating the group of individuals who work together on a specific goal for a defined period of time to achieve certain goals..
5.30. `IFMSA' or the International Federation of Medical Students' Associations is a network of medical students from all over the world and comprises National Member organizations (NMOs).
5.31. A 'Policy Statement' is a clear, concise, & authoritative document that outlines the position and perspective of MSA-Pakistan on a specific field or issue..
a) A 'Policy Statement' is a succinct and focused piece that directly conveys the organization's stance without including extraneous background, discussions, or external references
b) The policy statement is intended to be a concise and impactful document, with a maximum length of 2 pages. It typically consists of an introduction, a clear articulation of MSA-Pakistan's position, and a call to action. This format allows MSA-Pakistan to effectively communicate its stance and recommended course of action in a direct and accessible manner.
5.32. A `Task Force' or 'TF' comprises individuals appointed by the president and led by a designated Head, operating under the supervision of the President and the Concerned EBTO, tasked with specific assignments.
6. MEMBERS 6.1. Only the Executive Board of MSA-Pakistan has the
authority to decide whether to accept or reject new members. 6.2. MSA-Pakistan represents its own members and no student/member is represented against their will. 6.3. At any given time, 6 0% of all MSA-Pakistan members will exclusively be medical students studying in a course that leads to a medical doctor degree (i.e., MBBS). a. To maintain this balance, the Vice President for
Members (VPM) will assess the ratio of medical (MBBS) students to non-medical (BDS,

D-Pharmacy, BSN, DPT, AHS) students every three months. b. In the event an imbalance is detected, the Vice President of Membership (VPM) shall suspend the membership of non-medical students, until such time as the balance is restored, subject to the approval of the President. 6.4. Students enrolled in an institute recognized by the Higher Education Commission (HEC) and relevant Councils/Authorities, pursuing the following degrees, are eligible for MSA-Pakistan membership irrespective of color, creed, race, language, religion and political affiliation. a) Bachelor of Medicine & Bachelor of Surgery (MBBS), b) Bachelor of Dental Surgery (BDS) c) Doctor of Physiotherapy (DPT) d) BS Nursing (Generic) (BScN) e) Bachelor in Pharmacy (5 Years), 6.5. In the case of medical and dental students, the person applying for membership must be a student of a PMDC recognized medical or dental school. 6.6. In the case of students other than medical and dental students, the person applying for membership must be a student of an institute recognized by the Higher Education Commission (HEC) and relevant Councils/Authorities, 6.7. PMDC recognition of the medical or dental school must be of "Full" status, as the World Health Organization recognizes fully recognized medical schools of PMDC. 6.8. Membership in MSA-Pakistan is available to all eligible medical, dental, and allied health students, regardless of race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, sex, age, sexual orientation, gender identity, or disabilities. 6.9. Only medical or dental students (MBBS or BDS) can apply for MSA-Pakistan EBTO positions, except for the position of the MSA-Pakistan President. 6.10. Only a medical student (MBBS) can apply for the MSA-Pakistan President position. 6.11. MSA-Pakistan EB reserves the right to rebuke the membership of any person found to be involved in illegal activities including but not limited to conditions mentioned in bylaws § 6.14. , while being a member of MSA-Pakistan. 6.12. Any change in membership fee shall be determined at the NGA and is subject to change only after a unanimous vote by the EB outside the NGA. 6.13. The membership fee can be increased to a maximum of 15% of fee in a financial year.

11

6.14. The MSA-Pakistan EB reserves the right to suspend

the membership of any member under following

conditions:

a) is found to be involved in any illegal activity

b) is found to be in-disciplined and reprimanded by

the medical school.

c) is found to be involved in illegal activities against

medical schools, faculty & hospitals.

d) is working against MSA-Pakistan.

e) Member is working against the constitution &

bylaws of MSA-Pakistan.

f) is disciplined by the disciplinary committee of

his/her medical school.

g) has engaged in the use of unethical words and

remarks, which clearly contradicts the ethics and

societal norms upheld by MSA-Pakistan across

all its forums.

6.15. Eligible students may become members on

payment of the prescribed membership fee i.e. PKR

1000/- and filling the MSA-Pakistan Membership

Form completely and accurately.

6.16. The MSA-Pakistan EB shall send the updated

MSA-Pakistan Membership Form to all Local

Councils and Coordinator Institutes within 7 days of

the start of the term of the EB.

6.17. Each Local Council and Coordinator Institute shall

send updated members list mentioning status of

member (i.e active , alumni or banned) to the

national

VPM's

email

address

at

vpm@msapakistan.org according to annex (1).

6.18. Whenever a member pays their membership fee in

cash, both the local Vice President for Finances

(VPF) and the Local President/Coordinator must

sign and stamp the payment receipt.

6.19. All Local Councils and Coordinator Institutes must

transfer any collected membership fees to the bank

account specified by the national President and

send the bank transfer receipt to the national Vice

President for Members (VPM) email address

(vpm@msapakistan.org), cc'd to national VPF

(vpf@msapakistan.org) and national resident

(president@msapakistan.org) according to Annex 1.

6.20. All payments for membership fee are due in

accordance with Annex 1.

6.21. If a Local Council and Coordinator Institute fails to

follow the above-mentioned regulations, the

MSA-Pakistan EB can decide to take appropriate

action(s) depending upon the number of times the

regulation was violated. The MSA-Pakistan EB can

withhold the approval of future activities, member

certifications, and deny opportunities to the

members of that Local Council or Coordinator

Institute.

6.22. If a General Member fails to follow the above-mentioned regulations, the MSA-Pakistan EB can decide to take appropriate action(s) depending upon the number of times the regulation was violated. The MSA-Pakistan EB can withhold the member's certifications, and deny MSA-Pakistan opportunities to that member.
6.23. Termination of Membership 6.23.1. Membership may be terminated in cases of
misbehavior that causes harm to the Association. The member can be expelled as a result of a decision by a 2/3rd majority of EBTO after a thorough investigation into the circumstance. No membership can be terminated under assumptions of harm to the Association. 6.23.2. Any member or any external organization which is in official collaboration with MSA-Pakistan may submit a written complaint to the President or Supervising Council if the conduct of an MSA-Pakistan member has been injurious to the character of MSA-Pakistan.
a. The President shall issue a show-cause notice to the particular member.
b. The President shall set up a 3 members Judging Panel consisting of uninvolved Supervising Council members, Executive Board and National Officers.
c. The Judging Panel shall be given time of seven (7) working days.
6.23.3. The matter is discussed by the Judging Panel hearing both sides of the matter and the decision shall be forwarded to The president for implementation.
6.23.4. The judging panel is mandated to terminate the membership for a mentioned period and termination of membership must be avoided as much as possible.
6.23.5. The EBTO with  Voting can lower the penalty i.e termination period in case of a request by the concerned member, However EBTO cannot increase the penalty.
6.23.6. In case of termination of any member holding office then it will be according to bylaws § 9.1.4.
6.23.7. The decision of the Judging Panel along with the judging process and minutes of the meeting must be shared with the SupCo, EBTO, LC President(s) of MSA-Pakistan within 3 days after a decision is made.
6.23.8. The member concerned must receive at least one (1) week's prior notice of the Judgement Panel Day with the Judging Panel member names. During the course of two weeks, the questioned member can demand a change in the members of the Judging Panel if they wish to eliminate bias.

12

6.23.9. Within seven (7) days of the resolution to terminate the member being passed, MSA-Pakistan shall give the member a written notification of the resolution.

6.24. MSA-Pakistan General Members

6.24.1. Any student fulfilling the criteria mentioned in

bylaws § 6.4 can apply for membership of

MSA-Pakistan, regardless of whether an

MSA-Pakistan Local Council or Coordinator Institute

currently exists in their institute.

6.24.2. Eligible individuals may become members on

payment of the prescribed membership fee and

filling the MSA-Pakistan Membership Form

completely and accurately.

6.24.3. General Members' applications will be reviewed by

the MSA-Pakistan EB and approved accordingly if

the criteria are fulfilled.

6.24.4. Individuals applying for membership with

MSA-Pakistan must formally resign, in writing and

with their signature, from any other similar

organization within Pakistan in the event of a

conflict of interest. This resignation should be sent

via email to the Secretary General or equivalent and

Executive Board or governing Body of the other

organization, with evidence of the resignation

submitted

to

MSA-Pakistan

at

vpm@msapakistan.org,

cc'd

to

president@msapakistan.org

and

ebto@msapakistan.org

6.24.5. General Members are not allowed to be involved in

any other similar organization with a conflict of

interest, in any capacity involving organizing,

conducting, coordinating, or facilitating activities.

6.25. Honorary MSA-Pakistan Lifetime Membership 6.25.1. Honorary MSA-Pakistan Lifetime Members are
members of MSA-Pakistan who have greatly contributed to the achievements and aims of MSA-Pakistan and are voted upon by the EBTO. 6.25.2. Calls for candidates for Honorary MSA-Pakistan Lifetime Membership will be opened at the National General Assembly. 6.25.3. They are voted upon by all members of the Executive Board and Team of Officials by a two-third majority and have lifetime MSA-Pakistan membership. 6.25.4. Honorary MSA-Pakistan Lifetime Members shall be invited to all MSA-Pakistan events. 6.25.5. Honorary MSA-Pakistan Lifetime Members shall pay a membership fee of PKR zero (0) to MSA-Pakistan. 6.25.6. The EBTO can take away the Honorary Lifetime Membership from a person,as described in bylaws § 6.23.

7. LOCAL COUNCILS & COORDINATOR

INSTITUTES

7.1. General

7.1.1. A Local Council (LC) of MSA-Pakistan is a member

organization of medical students within a medical

school/university and has a status of Permanent,

Temporary, or Candidate LC.

7.1.2. A Coordinator Institute is a member institute of

medical students within a medical school/university

in which the MSA-Pakistan EB has appointed an

official Coordinator.

7.1.3. No student/member shall be represented by an LC

or CI against his/her will.

7.1.4. For official external and internal communication, the

name used by MSA-Pakistan will be the medical

school/university's name followed by `LC' as a suffix.

7.1.5. An LC or CI will be addressed by a name according

to the following pattern MSA-Pakistan (medical

school/university's abbreviation) LC, e.g.,

MSA-Pakistan ABCD LC if ABCD is an official

abbreviation of a member medical school/university

of MSA-Pakistan.

7.1.6. Only

medical/dental/Allied

health

schools/universities are eligible to become a

Permanent, Temporary, and Candidate LC or a

Coordinator Institute (CI).

7.1.7. MSA-Pakistan represents students studying and

graduates/trainees of a medical (MBBS) or

paramedical/Allied health degree in an educational

institution recognized by the Pakistan Medical &

Dental Council (PMDC) and/or the Higher Education

Commission (HEC) of Pakistan.

7.1.8. The bylaws § 7.1.7. applies to all members, except:

entries that received a Standing Invitation to

participate as an MSA-Pakistan member. Extending

a Standing Invitation is decided by the NGA with

two thirds () majority.

7.1.9. Only one LC or CI can represent a medical

school/university in MSA-Pakistan.

7.1.10. MSA-Pakistan Membership is open to all

students/graduates/trainees within that LC/CI in

accordance with the membership rules set forth in

the constitution & bylaws .

7.1.11. All LCs and CIs of MSA-Pakistan must abide by the

constitution & bylaws of MSA-Pakistan at all times. If

a member at any time does not abide by the

constitution & bylaws, the MSA-Pakistan may decide

to revoke the membership status of that particular

individual according to bylaws § 6.23

7.1.12. All LCs and CIs must submit the information

mentioned in Annex 2 to the Constitution

Credential Committee (CCC) at every NGA Meeting.

If the LC or CI fails to submit these completed

documents for two consecutive NGA Meetings, then

13

a motion shall be tabled by the MSA-Pakistan EB to remove the Permanent status of that LC. The Permanent status is removed by a simple majority and will take effect immediately. 7.1.13. Whenever a Permanent LC fails to fulfill their status requirements as listed in Annex 2, the MSA-Pakistan EB has to submit a report to the CCC regarding this before the start of the relevant plenary session of the NGA Meeting. This report must specify which requirements the LC did not fulfill. With this report, the CCC will review the membership status of the LC and will submit a recommendation in its report to the NGA regarding a possible change of status for the LC.
7.2. Change of LC/CI Status 7.2.1. Coordinator Institute to Candidate LC
i. New Coordinator Institutes can apply throughout the term to become a part of MSA-Pakistan.
ii. Any student applying for membership from an unrepresented medical school/university will be offered to put forward a candidature for the post of Coordinator in that Coordinator Institute.
iii. National VPI will schedule an interview within 1 week of receipt of the application from an individual Coordinator Institute.
iv. A Coordinator Institute (CI) will automatically be promoted to a Candidate LC if it completes conditions described in bylaws § 7.2.1.5 in accordance with the guidelines mentioned in Annex 2.
v. Eligibility Criteria: a. Must be a coordinator Institute (CI) for at least 1 month. b. Must have at least 30 members. c. Must have a No Objection Certificate (NOC) signed from the head/principal/dean of the medical school/university which they represent. The NOC should be according to the sample in Annex 3. d. Must have EBTOs structuralized according to the EBTO structure of MSA-Pakistan. e. Must have at least 70% of EBTO positions filled.
vi. The Candidate LC is announced before the upcoming NGA where its candidature is put forward to be voted upon by the NGA after approval of MSA-Pakistan EB.
7.2.2. Candidate LC to Temporary LC i) A Candidate LC attains the status of Temporary LC if it achieves 2/3rd majority at the NGA.

7.2.3. Temporary LC to Permanent LC i) Temporary LC shall stay temporary for a period of 1 year successful change of status in NGA , after which it is evaluated by the EB of MSA-Pakistan on criteria described below: a) Must have submitted the Bimonthly Membership Reports within the deadline according to Annex 1. b) Must be financially sustainable. c) Must have at least 4 activities coordinated and executed. d) Must have a sustainable EBTO with motivated members to ensure regular replacement of local officials. e) Must be following the deadlines according to Annex 1 and Annex 2. ii) A Temporary LC can maintain its status for a maximum of three (3) years.
iii) If a Temporary LC is not promoted to a Permanent LC within three (3) years, they immediately lose their Temporary LC status and are demoted to a Candidate LC status.
7.3. Change of Status Guidelines 7.3.1. The status change will be presented by the EB of
MSA-Pakistan at the NGAs. 7.3.2. If MSA-Pakistan EB feels a Temporary or Permanent
LC has not followed any of the criteria mentioned bylaws § 7.3.2 (a-g), it can be demoted to a lower LC status.
a) Is not working at a capacity for it to be sustainable, or is not sustainable anymore,
b) Is not following guidelines by MSA-Pakistan EB,
c) Is not working at a capacity for it to be sustainable,
d) Is guilty of accounts failure and financial mismanagement,
e) Has missed three consecutive Bimonthly Membership Report deadlines according to the Annex 1,
f) Has missed submission of Annual Activities Report, Financial and Membership report according to Annex 1 and 2,
g) Has not transferred membership fee in accordance with Annex 1, either missed three consecutive immediate transfer deadlines or missed the Annual Transfer deadline once according to Annex 1.
7.3.3. If a Permanent LC has intra-LC feuds which have spilled over to the national level and the National EB feels that LC working has been impaired to make LC working impossible, the MSA-Pakistan EB can issue 2 warnings at a 1-month interval. Thereafter, if the

14

warnings have not improved the conditions of the LC, the MSA-Pakistan EB may convert the status of the LC from Permanent to Temporary by a unanimous vote of the MSA-Pakistan EB and proceed with presenting the case at an NGA.
7.4. Procedure for Change of Status 7.4.1. An NGA decision with simple majority can convert
an LC status to a lower status which would be reviewed by the MSA-Pakistan EB after 6 months. MSA-Pakistan EB can revert the status by simple majority within the EB. 7.4.2. The MSA-Pakistan EB must submit a Membership Application Review report for each Change of Status application that shall cover each institute in at least the fields mentioned below:
a. Current Involvement in MSA-Pakistan b. Compatibility of the mission, goals,
structure, trainings and activities with the mission, goals, structure, trainings, and activities of MSA-Pakistan c. The record of number of students, number of medical faculties, and number of actively involved students in the LC d. The record of number of activities, trainings, and exchanges work done at the level of LC representing overall activity level, active standing committees, and the specific trainings and activities conducted e. Documents from the LC clarifying the current status and level of activity of the LC f. Future potential for contribution to MSA-Pakistan g. Collaboration with other LCs h. Inter-LC working and intra-LC coordination i. Relationship between other LCs in present and past, taking into consideration reasons for any conflicts and Level of cooperation with the MSA-Pakistan EB in any such investigation. 7.5. Things which are to be viewed by MSA-Pakistan EB for declaring an LC as sustainable are: a. Number of years represented as an official LC b. Account and financial support of the LC c. Sustainable structure which ensures continuous input of members/alumni from earlier years of schooling at that institute d. Number of activities, trainings, and exchanges work done at the level of the LC e. Collaboration with neighboring and other LCs.

7.6. Local Council EBTO Selection 7.6.1. All local officers shall conclude their terms of office
upon completion, with the exception of the president, who shall continue in their role until the appointment of the next president. 7.6.2. The current LC president will open call for new LC President on all social media handles of the LC, in the call it should be clearly mentioned that a CV, Motivation Letter, and Plan of Action must be sent to the official email ID of the current LC President and cc'd to ebto@msapakistan.org and National Vice president for Internal Affairs at vpi@msapakistan.org. 7.6.3. The MSA-Pakistan EB, Supervising Council, and the current LC President will conduct interviews with the candidates for the LC President position. 7.6.4. The MSA-Pakistan EB can take a unanimous decision and conduct the interview(s) of the LC President applicant(s) in case the current LC President is unavailable. The EB shall involve the previous LC EB member(s) for the interview procedure to maintain transparency. 7.6.5. Once the LC President is selected, the newly selected LC President will open calls on the LC social media handles for the rest of the Local EBTO positions, the application (CV, Motivation Letter, and Plan of Action) is to be sent via email at the LC President email and cc'd to ebto@msapakistan.org and National Vice president for Internal Affairs at vpi@msapakistan.org. 7.6.6. Interviews for local EBTO positions will be scheduled, and taken by the respective National EBTO for each position along with the LC President. The interviewers will decide on finalizing between the LC EBTO applicants. 7.6.7. The interviews of local EBTO are recommended to be taken by their respective National EBTO positions. 7.6.8. Interviews' dates will be set up by the National VPI. 7.6.9. All the interviewers will have access to the scoring sheet and questions will be standardized by the MSA-Pakistan EB. All the Interviewers will score for each question. More questions can be added on demand. 7.6.10. An email will be sent by the MSA-Pakistan EB about the timeline/dates for the selection of the new LC EBTO in each LC. 7.6.11. The date/month will be decided keeping in mind the availability of local EBTO candidates for the LC, and the professionals/examinations schedule in the LC. 7.6.12. Any member of the Local Council Executive Board and Team of Officials (LC EBTO), excluding the President, who fails to remain active in their

15

designated role for a continuous period of one (1) month without valid justification, shall be liable for removal from office. 7.6.13. The concerned member must be issued a written warning at least seven (7) days prior to removal, granting them the opportunity to provide an explanation for their inactivity. 7.6.14. Upon removal, the vacated position shall be reopened for applications in accordance with bylaws § 7.6.5­7.6.7
7.7. LC Presidents & Coordinators 7.7.1. LC Presidents and Coordinators are MSA-Pakistan
Officials and are mandated to abide by the MSA-Pakistan constitution & bylaws. 7.7.2. LC Presidents and Coordinators must report to the MSA-Pakistan EBTO as and when demanded. 7.7.3. LC Presidents and Coordinators must ensure the continuous development and sustainability of their LC/CI along with ensuring all submissions are timely done and deadlines are met. 7.7.4. LC Presidents and Coordinators must maintain cordial relations with the MSA-Pakistan EBTO and other LC Presidents/Coordinators. 7.7.5. LC Presidents and Coordinators shall be removed from office by the MSA-Pakistan Supervising Council for any of the reasons mentioned below:
a. Fraud b. Committing a criminal offense c. Malfunction of office by not completing
official duties for 3 months without any valid reason. d. Inability to fulfill duties for a period longer than 2 months, without prior notice to the EB and SupCo e. Breaking the constitution & bylaws f. Deliberately working against decisions of the EBTO g. Failing to communicate with the organizational bodies h. Refusing to report i. Vote of No Confidence with 2/3rd majority 7.7.6. Accountability of Local Council Members Serving in National Roles 7.7.6.1. Any Local Council member who simultaneously holds an official position in the MSA-Pakistan National Executive Board, Team of Officials, or any National Committee, remains obligated to fulfill their responsibilities towards their Local Council. 7.7.6.2. Prior to any disciplinary decision, the member must be issued a formal written notice and granted a minimum of seven (7) days to provide an explanation for their conduct.

7.7.7. Communication Between Local Councils 7.7.7.1. All official communication between Local Councils (LCs) shall be routed through the office of the Local Council President. 7.7.7.2. Direct communication between members or EBTOs of different LCs is not permitted for official matters, unless explicitly authorized by their respective LC Presidents
7.7.8. Restrictions on Direct Approaches 7.7.8.1. Members of MSA-Pakistan, including National Officials, shall not directly approach Local Council EBTOs or members of another LC without prior knowledge and approval of the respective LC President. 7.7.8.2. This regulation is intended to preserve the organizational hierarchy and ensure accountability in all official matters. 7.7.8.3. Any breach of this clause shall be addressed in accordance with bylaws § 6.14 and § 6.23.
7.8. LC Calendar of Events: 7.8.1. Calendar of events is a tabulated Google sheet
mentioning the main events in the LC of the upcoming term. 7.8.2. A map initiated by the National VPI and VPA will be created where the Local VPI and VPA will add their activities as well as the timeline for membership drive, orientation seminar, online meetings/live meetings. 7.8.3. Activities should be added bimonthly and conducted in the next two months after adding it to the calendar. 7.8.4. Deadline for updating the calendar tentatively for the upcoming two months would be the 14th of every second month.
8. NATIONAL MEETINGS 8.1. National General Assembly (NGA) 8.1.1. The National General Assembly meeting (NGA) is
the annual conference of MSA-Pakistan and comprises plenary sessions, standing committee sessions, workshops, and elections of the new EBTO officials. 8.1.2. The NGA is the highest authority and decision-making body of the Association. 8.1.3. The NGA shall meet at least but not limited, once each year. 8.1.4. The NGA will be organized by an Organizing Committee selected by the MSA-Pakistan EBTO. a) The NGA Date Shall be decided by the EBTO. b) The tentative date shall be between 20th July to
20th August 8.1.5. The calls for the NGA Organizing Committee will be

16

opened no later than 5 months before the scheduled dates of the NGA. 8.1.6. The NGA Organizing Committee will be selected by a vote of the Executive Board. 8.1.7. The NGA Organizing Committee will report to the MSA-Pakistan President and EB. 8.1.8. One-third () of all Permanent and Temporary Local Councils with voting rights shall form a quorum. 8.1.9. If one third of the Permanent and Temporary Local Councils propose/agree to an extraordinary meeting of the NGA, it must be arranged immediately. 8.1.10. The National General Assembly must include the following: a) Functional plenary for bylaw changes and
election of new EBTO b) Standing Committee Sessions and/or
Workshops subject to approval from the EB. c) Presentation and adoption of the reports of
the current EBTOs. 8.1.11. The NGA may also include other events (such as
theme events, activities fair etc.) which will be decided by the OC subject to approval by the EB 8.1.12. The NGA must be held in person and shall be open to all members of the Association. 8.1.13. In unforeseen circumstances, EBTO may decide to shift mode of NGA to online after approval from the supervising council and through an extraordinary voting with 2/3 Majority from Local Councils. 8.1.14. A delegate is a representative of a Local Council who has been instructed by that LC to exercise their parliamentary right at the NGA meeting. 8.1.15. The Local Council President or Head of Delegation has to register and submit all participants to the Constitution Credential Committee (CCC) by filling out a Credential Form. This submission must be done to the CCC before the start of the 2nd plenary of the NGA. 8.1.16. Observers and Externals are to be registered by the MSA-Pakistan EB. Delegates, who fail to register, cannot participate in the plenary sessions. 8.1.17. Participants in MSA-Pakistan NGA meetings are:
a. Delegates from Permanent and Temporary Local Councils and Coordinator Institutes
b. Members from institutes which do not fit in the above mentioned category (MSA-Pakistan General Members)
c. MSA-Pakistan Officials d. Staff and Faculty of MSA-Pakistan Local
Councils' Institutes e. MSA-Pakistan Honorary Life Members f. Chairpersons of NGA meetings g. Members of the Constitution Credential
Committee (CCC) h. Members of the Financial Committee

i. Task

Forces'

and

Programs'

Representatives

j. Organizing Committee members and staff

of NGA Meetings

k. Support persons selected by the Team of

Officials

l. Any person invited by EBTO

8.1.18. Local Councils and Coordinator Institutes with

outstanding debts to the Organizing

Committee from a previous NGA Meeting due

to late cancellation, delegates not showing up,

and/or delegates not paying the participation

fee cannot participate in another NGA meeting

before having cleared these debts. The

MSA-Pakistan EB decides on these matters

and must inform the LC or CI in question at

least three months before the next NGA

meeting.

8.1.19. Observers in NGA meetings are:

a. Any medical student not represented by

MSA-Pakistan

b. Invited guests

c. Delegates of organizations in official

relationship with MSA-Pakistan

d. External advisors

8.1.20. The participation of participants under 8.1.19(a) must

be approved by the NGA Organizing Committee

and by the MSA-Pakistan EB.

8.1.21. The participation of participants under 8.1.19(b, c,

and d) must be approved by the MSA-Pakistan EB.

8.1.22. Speaking rights: all participants and observers

mentioned on the Credential Form submitted to

CCC have speaking rights during the NGA.

8.1.23. Proposing rights and on behalf of: Organizing

Committee members, observers, staff, and faculty of

Local Councils' Institutes' do not have proposing

rights.

8.1.24. Only participants can have proposing rights

during NGA meetings

8.1.25. Delegates of Temporary LCs, Permanent LCs,

Coordinator Institutes, session team members

and support persons have proposing rights

only on behalf of their LC or CI.

8.1.26. Supervising Council members, CCC members,

Financial Committee members, Programs', and

Task Forces' representatives have proposing

rights only on behalf of their respective body

and only after such a decision has been made

by them and recorded to their relevant minutes

or reports.

8.1.27. MSA-Pakistan Officials have no proposing

rights on behalf of their LCs.

8.1.28. MSA-Pakistan Officials have no speaking rights

on behalf of their LCs except when presenting

17

their candidatures.
8.2. Special General Assembly (SGA) 8.2.1. In any unforeseen circumstances, a Special
General Assembly (SGA) can be called by the Executive Board to make bylaw changes, elect EBTO members or to replace an EBTO member who resigned/was removed, approval from the supervising council and through an extraordinary voting with 2/3 Majority from Local Councils. 8.2.2. The SGA must be held in person or online. 8.2.3. Notice for SGA should be given at least 1 week before it takes place to the Executive Board, Supervising Council and Team of Officials. 8.2.4. The quorum of the SGA shall be one-third () of all Permanent and Temporary Local Councils with voting rights. 8.2.5. During an SGA, should there be vacant EBTO positions, application calls will be opened and voted upon by registered voters. 8.2.6. The proceedings of an SGA shall be regulated in a manner similar to plenaries. 8.2.7. The calls for the plenary team for an SGA should be opened at least 1 week prior to the scheduled date. 8.3. Plenary Team 8.3.1. The plenary team shall be composed of:
a. Chairperson (1) b. Vice Chairperson (1) c. Secretary (1) d. Assistant Secretaries (2) e. Returning Officers. (4) 8.3.2. The Chairperson and the Vice Chairperson must have participated in at least one previous MSA-Pakistan NGA meeting. 8.3.3. The Chairperson and Vice Chairperson will be elected during the first plenary session by the Permanent and Temporary LCs that are present and had voting rights during the previous NGA meeting. 8.3.4. The MSA-Pakistan EB has the responsibility to Chair the plenary until the Chairperson is elected or in the event that both the Chairperson and the Vice Chairperson are absent by the appointed time for the opening of the plenary. This temporary Chairperson shall act until the Chairperson, the Vice Chairperson, or both arrive at the meeting and take over the Chair. 8.3.5. The Chairperson is responsible for: a. The conduct of the meeting b. Interpreting and giving their ruling on all
matters of procedure, order, competency

and relevancy, as stated in the bylaws c. Informing all LCs and CIs about the
motions that will be presented in each plenary session at the NGA at least two hours before the plenary session at the National General Assembly meeting is scheduled to start 8.3.6. The Vice Chairperson shall assist the Chairperson in their work. The Vice Chairperson shall take the Chair: a. when requested by the Chairperson b. when the Chairperson is absent at the appointed time for the opening of the meeting c. when the Chairperson is involved in the topic under discussion d. during the elections in which the Chairperson is a candidate e. when the Chairperson is removed through a "Vote of No Confidence". 8.3.7. The Chairperson can appoint one Secretary and two Assistant Secretaries for the meeting once the Chairperson is elected. The Secretaries will record minutes of the entire NGA meeting. 8.3.8. The Permanent and Temporary Local Councils who had voting rights at the previous NGA will elect 4 Returning Officers. The Returning Officers should preferably be observers. They will assist during voting through handing out & collecting ballot papers & by counting votes. 8.3.9. EBTO members not attending the plenary will be required to provide a detailed explanation for their absence at least 2 weeks prior to the date of the plenary or will be subject to review by the Supervising Council which may lead to their removal from office. 8.3.10. A motion is passed nemo contra if there are no amendments or direct negatives.
8.4. Motion and Debate 8.4.1. A written motion must be tabled before debate is
undertaken on a subject. Motions must be given to the Chair before the deadline specified on the Motion Submission Form. 8.4.2. An implicit or explicit series of independent resolutions included in one single motion has to be divided into two or more independent motions upon request of any LC with voting rights (e.g. adoption of several reports at the same time). 8.4.3. The Chair shall decide when a tabled motion will be discussed. The Chair shall conduct the debate and decide upon the limitation of the discussion. 8.4.4. The motion shall be debated among the members in accordance with Annex 4. 8.4.5. Majorities will be defined as follows:

18

a. Simple majority: more votes in favor than against. Abstentions do not count.
b. Absolute majority: more than 50% of all the votes in favor. Abstentions do count.
c. Relative majority: the proposal receiving the most votes carries. Abstentions do not count. In case there are more votes against than for any of the proposals, all proposals fail.
d. Two-third () majority: The number of votes in favor is at least the double of the number of votes against. Abstentions do not count.
8.4.6. A motion pass if all of following conditions meet: a. No delegation gives a direct negative to the motion b. It reaches a simple majority of votes, unless otherwise specified in the bylaws c. It reaches a relative majority of votes in case there is an alternative motion
8.4.7. If a motion has not been seconded or has been defeated after voting, it shall not be reintroduced unless there is a procedural motion "The debate on a motion to be reopened".
8.4.8. A procedural motion that was not seconded or has been defeated after voting shall not be reintroduced by the same proposer during the NGA meeting.
8.4.9. A procedural motion shall take precedence over all terms of address to the Chair apart from Points of Order (POO), but shall not carry the right of interrupting the current speaker or a voting procedure. In the event of a procedural motion being carried it shall be put into effect immediately.
8.4.10. A procedural motion can be submitted at any time during a plenary session. In the event of a procedural motion being proposed, the Chairperson shall after a brief introduction by the proposer and ask for a seconder. If the motion is seconded, the Chairperson shall immediately put the procedural motion to a vote. It carries if it reaches a two-third () majority.
8.4.11. The following motions shall constitute procedural motions: a. To adopt the NGA/plenary agenda. b. To open the NGA/plenary agenda. c. To change the NGA/plenary agenda. d. The meeting to be opened. e. The meeting to be adjourned. f. The meeting to proceed immediately to a vote. g. The meeting to proceed to the next business. h. Consideration of the present motion to be postponed.

i. The debate on a motion to be reopened. j. The speakers' list to be reopened. k. Candidates for election leave the hall
during preliminary discussions. l. To suspend a paragraph of the constitution
& bylaws until the end of the NGA meeting or until it will be resumed by the NGA. m. To resume a paragraph of the constitution & bylaws that has been suspended. n. A discussion not to be recorded in the minutes. o. To Overrule the decision of the Chairperson. When the motion passes, the Chairperson shall reverse the ruling in question. p. Vote of no confidence in the Chair. When the motion passes the Chairperson shall immediately leave the Chair. In this case the Vice-Chairperson will become the Chairperson and a new Vice Chairperson has to be elected. q. To overrule the decisions of the CCC. When the procedural motion passes, the decision of the CCC will be reversed. If this concerns a proposal that had been refused by the CCC, the proposal can be brought forward. If this concerns a proposal that had been allowed by the CCC, the proposal will fail and not be discussed further. r. Observers must leave the room.
8.5. Point of Order (POO) 8.5.1. A point of order shall be concerned with the
enforcement of interpretations of the constitution & bylaws and policy statements of MSA-Pakistan. 8.5.2. A point of order shall take precedence over all other terms of address to the Chair and shall require the Chair immediately to allow the delegate to make their point of order. 8.5.3. In the event of any delegate using the point of order to make statements, which are not directly related to the defined concern, they shall be called to order by the Chairperson. 8.5.4. In the event of a delegate being so warned on three occasions during a NGA Meeting, their entire delegation shall lose the right to use the point of order for the rest of that Plenary Session.
8.6. Point of Information (POI) 8.6.1. A point of information to somebody shall be a brief
fact that is of value and relevance at this moment to the current speaker or to the meeting as a whole. It can in no case be used to express a personal point of view.

19

8.6.2. A point of information from somebody serves to put a brief question to the current speaker or the meeting at large, which is relevant to the particular debate.
8.6.3. When a point of information is indicated to the Chairperson while a speaker is speaking, the Chairperson will ask the speaker whether they will accept the point of information. In the event of the speaker refusing it, the Chairperson must make it as soon as the speaker has finished.
8.6.4. In the event of any delegate using the point of information to make statements that are not directly related to the defined concern of it, they shall be called to order by the Chairperson. In the event of a delegate being so warned on three occasions during a NGA Meeting their entire delegation shall lose the right to use the point of information for the rest of that Plenary Session.
8.7. Voting 8.7.1. Each Permanent and Temporary Local Council with
voting rights has 1 vote in all plenary sessions and 10 votes in all elections. 8.7.2. Each Candidate Local Council and Coordinator Institute has no votes in all plenary sessions and 1 vote in all elections. 8.7.3. The bodies having voting rights during MSA-Pakistan plenaries are only Permanent and Temporary Local Councils. 8.7.4. If a Permanent or Temporary Local Council delegation has less than 10 delegates then the votes for elections will be equal to the number of delegates. 8.7.5. If a Permanent or Temporary Local Council delegation has more than 10 delegates, the Head of Delegation will nominate and register the voters and submit the list to the CCC at ccc@msapakistan.org before the second plenary. The Local Council Cabinet Officials should be given priority by the Head of Delegation when selecting voters. 8.7.6. To obtain voting rights during NGA meetings, all Local Councils and Coordinator Institutes must fulfill all the requirements mentioned in Annex 2 and have no greater than PKR 2000 of financial debt towards MSA-Pakistan. 8.7.7. Until the final report of the CCC has been adopted, voting will only be done by the Local Councils and Coordinator Institutes, in accordance with the preliminary report of the CCC. 8.7.8. At the start of each plenary session, the Chair must conduct a Roll Call. All delegations with voting rights will be called upon to check if they are present. Official voting cards indicating the name of

the Local Council or Coordinator Institute with the institute of origin that are easily readable will be handed out to the Heads of Delegations that are present. The results of the Roll Call will be documented in the NGA meeting minutes. 8.7.9. If any delegation subsequently joins or leaves the plenary session, they have to inform the Chair who will hand out or take back the voting card and the voting device. If delegations fail to return the voting card and voting device before leaving the plenary session, they will lose their voting rights for the rest of that plenary session. At the end of all plenary sessions, the delegations have to return their voting card and voting devices to the Chair. 8.7.10. Decisions will be taken with a simple majority in cases of a single motion and relative majority in case of several motions, unless otherwise specified in the bylaws. 8.7.11. Voting during elections will be done by electronic voting devices, online or by ballot, except for the election of the Chair, CCC, & Financial Committee. In addition, voting by ballot shall take place if requested by a 2/3rd majority of permanent and temporary LCs with voting rights. The voting and announcement of election results should be done according to Annex 3. 8.7.12. Voting by ballot is done by indicating the vote on ballot paper or submitting the vote using an electronic voting system. The Chair decides whether to use ballot papers or an electronic voting system. 8.7.13. In case of suspected fraud or mistakes, the Chair shall call for a re-vote. In case the voting was conducted using an electronic voting system the Chair may decide to re-vote using ballot papers. 8.7.14. Permanent LCs unable to attend the NGA meeting can vote by proxy in case of changes to the bylaws. In order for a Permanent LC to be allowed to grant power of attorney to another Permanent LC in order to cast a vote, they must provide a letter to the other Permanent LC and to the national Secretary General in electronic format by email, signed and stamped by the LC President, in which they will clearly state this decision. Both of the Permanent LCs must have voting rights. A Permanent LC is allowed to cast a vote for a maximum of two Permanent LCs. 8.7.15. The MSA-Pakistan EB may call for an online voting in the period between NGA meetings, in order to vote on emergency decisions or to resolve important issues arising from unpredictable circumstances. Each LC with voting rights during the last NGA meeting will receive an email with instructions on how to access the secure online voting system. The rules of majority will be those defined by the constitution & bylaws concerning the

20

matter voted upon. Voting on election will be done and announced in accordance to Annex 3. 8.7.16. The Oath will be taken accordingly as well.
8.8. Sub-Regional Trainings 8.8.1. Sub-Regional Trainings or 'SRTs' are national
capacity-building meetings that can be held at any time of the year and are organized by the Vice President for Capacity Building along with the SRT Organizing Committee. 8.8.2. Proposals for all SRTs must be submitted by the VPCB to the international VPCB at least six months before the scheduled dates of the SRT. 8.8.3. All MSA Pakistan EBTOs are expected to work with the VPCB to develop proposals for SRT. 8.8.4. The SRT Organizing Chairperson and Organizing Committee report to the MSA Pakistan President and VPCB.
8.9. Presidents' Session 8.9.1. Presidents' Session is meeting of All LC presidents 8.9.2. The National President can call a Presidential
session to get a vote on Investigation reports or any other important agenda outside the NGA, with a prior notice of at least 1 week. 8.9.3.  of total Permanent and Temporary LCs will make quorum.
9. OFFICIALS 9.1. MSA-Pakistan Executive Board (EB) and Team of
Officials (TO) 9.1.1. MSA-Pakistan shall be managed by the Executive
Board and Team of Officials. The Executive Board of the Association is composed of nine (9) positions. The National General Assembly votes the EB members as (1 each): a) President (1) b) Vice-President for Internal Affairs (VPI) (1) c) Vice-President for External Affairs (VPE) (2) d) Vice-President for Activities (VPA) (1) e) Vice-President for Capacity Building (VPCB) (1) f) Vice-President for Members (VPM) (1) g) Vice-President for Finances (VPF) (1) h) Vice-President for Public Relations &
Communication (1) 9.1.2. The Executive Board and the Team of Officials are
elected for a period of one (1) year. 9.1.3. The term of an EBTO member can be extended to
not beyond 2 months, in case the position remains vacant. 9.1.4. The Team of Officials is composed of six (6) positions. The National General Assembly also votes on the Team of Officials consisting of: a) National Public Health Officer (NPO) (SCOPH)

(1) b) National Officer on Human Rights and Peace
(NORP) (SCORP) (1) c) National Officer on Sexual and Reproductive
Health and Rights including HIV & AIDS (NORA) (SCORA) (1) d) National Officer on Medical Education (NOME) (SCOME) (1) e) National Officer on Research Exchange (NORE) (SCORE) (1) f) National Exchange Officer (NEO) (SCOPE) (1) 9.2. The Executive Board and the Team of Officials are entitled to officially represent the Association. 9.2.1. The term of office of all the EBTO members runs from October 1st until September 30th of the next year. 9.2.2. Before the term begins, there is a preparatory or handover period from immediately after their election until September 30th of that year. In this preparatory or handover period, the respective outgoing EBTO member shall extensively handover all data and resources to the incoming Official. 9.2.3. After the end of the term of the EBTO member there is an advisory period of one month for their successor from the start of term. 9.2.4. Officials in their preparatory and advisory periods are expected to participate in NGA meetings and to be active resource persons and provide their successors with their gained experience.
9.3. Supervising Council (SupCo) 9.3.1. The Supervising Council is composed of at least two
(2) and a maximum of three (3) members. 9.3.2. Supervising Council members shall not hold any
other official position within MSA-Pakistan. 9.3.3. The Supervisory Council has the power to overrule
decisions of the EBTO for important reasons as described in bylaws § 11.8.15 9.3.4. The Supervising Council has the power to suspend or remove any MSA-Pakistan official from their office for important reasons as described in bylaws § 11.10.1 9.3.5. Election of the Supervising Council will be done at NGA according to bylaws § 13 9.3.6. Candidates for the Supervising Council must have served at least one term as an EBTO member of MSA-Pakistan. 9.3.7. The Supervising Council members are elected for a period of one (1) year. 9.3.8. The term of a Supervising Council member can be extended to not beyond 3 months, in case the position remains vacant. 9.3.9. In any unforeseen circumstances, an online special general assembly (SGA) can be called to make bylaw

21

changes or elect/replace EBTO members after taking permission from the Supervising Council and informing members of MSA-Pakistan about the same. 9.3.10. All decisions regarding overruling of EB decisions by SupCo shall be present in NGA for adoption a) If a decision doesn't get  majority then it shall
be considered invalid and EB/EBTO decision shall be considered valid. b) In an event that 5 or more decision of SupCo failed to get  majority in NGA, an internal inquiry against SupCo shall be initiated by new SupCo to investigate the reasons and failure to explain the overruling of decision(s) shall lead to termination of that person from position (if any), immediately and shall be banned for 3 years from holding any office in MSA-Pakistan at any level.
9.4. National Assistants 9.4.1. Executive Board and Team of Officials members can
appoint national assistants to aid them in their work as a part of their teams. 9.4.2. The Official to whom this task belonged will remain responsible themselves for this task at all times. 9.4.3. National Assistants of the EBTO who work in specific areas must be appointed by the respective Executive Board or Team of Officials member 9.4.4. A National Assistant has to be a member of a MSA-Pakistan that is not in violation with the MSA Pakistan constitution & bylaws. 9.4.5. No person shall hold more than one National Assistant position per term
10. STANDING COMMITTEES 10.1. Definition: a Standing Committee works to benefit
a specific field of interest 10.2. The MSA-Pakistan Standing Committees are:
a) Standing Committee on Public Health (SCOPH)
b) Standing Committee on Sexual and Reproductive Health and Rights including HIV & AIDS (SCORA)
c) Standing Committee on Medical Education (SCOME)
d) Standing Committee on human Rights and Peace (SCORP)
e) Standing Committee on Professional Exchange (SCOPE)
f) Standing Committee on Research Exchange (SCORE)
10.2.1. Any member of MSA-Pakistan can participate in any of the Standing Committees and their initiatives such as activities and workshops at their will.

10.2.2. Requirements for maintaining membership in Standing Committees are defined in the relevant MSA-Pakistan Standing Committee Regulations. All members of a Standing Committee must abide by the Standing Committees Regulations at all times to avoid their membership being revoked from that particular Standing Committee.
10.2.3. To create a new Standing Committee of MSA-Pakistan, a proposal to establish a new Standing Committee must be submitted before the National General Assembly. At least six (6) Permanent LCs must agree to and announce, in this proposal, their interest and active participation in the Standing Committee in question. The National General Assembly will decide about this proposal with a two-thirds majority.
10.2.4. The National General Assembly can decide to dissolve, change the activities, or change the name of a Standing Committee. Such a decision needs at least two-thirds majority.
10.2.5. MSA-Pakistan National Officers of all Standing Committees must attend the National General Assembly Meetings.
10.2.6. The Standing Committee meets once during the National General Assembly Meetings. The Standing Committee meets at least twice a year.
10.2.7. The Standing Committee meeting is the decision making body of the respective Standing Committee.
10.2.8. The objectives of a Standing Committee meeting are:
a) To run activities with concrete plans of action, coordination and working strategies.
b) To report their activities back to the MSA-Pakistan's leaders.
c) To discuss possible changes to the Standing Committee Regulations and vote upon them.
11. DUTIES OF THE EXECUTIVE BOARD 11.1. General Duties: 11.1.1. The Executive Board is the governing body of the
MSA-Pakistan and is responsible for the work of MSA-Pakistan, within the mandate, guidelines and decisions provided at these meetings. 11.1.2. Each incoming EB member shall present strategic/operational plans after being elected. 11.1.3. Members of the EB must attend all National General Assembly meetings and Executive Board meetings. 11.1.4. EB members are not allowed to hold any other post in MSA-Pakistan. 11.1.5. No individual is allowed to have more than three terms as an EB member. 11.1.6. All EB members have representation authority in the name of MSA-Pakistan in the specific field of their task.

22

11.1.7. Any kind of legal contract involving MSA-Pakistan shall be signed by all EB members excluding vacant positions.
11.1.8. Any Kind of MOU shall be signed by The president and the VPE mandatorily.
11.1.9. The president can add any member as a signatory in the MOU.
11.1.10. EB members can delegate tasks to their national team(s) or other EB members.
11.1.11. The EB member to whom the tasks originally belonged will remain responsible for these tasks at all times.
11.1.12. The Executive Board shall meet at least once a month, either physically or online.
11.1.13. The Executive board and Team of Officials will have no less than five (5) meetings yearly.
11.1.14. Any EBTO member missing more than one meeting without prior notice, a complaint would be forwarded to the Supervising Council for necessary action
11.1.15. The quorum for an EB Meeting is two-thirds of the total number of EB members.
11.1.16. All EB members have one vote at the EB meeting. 11.1.17. The EB makes decisions with absolute majority. 11.1.18. In the case of a tie, the President will have the
casting vote. 11.1.19. EB members who cannot attend an EB meeting
have to inform the other EB members 11.1.20. Minutes of all EB meetings shall be recorded which
comprise a summary of discussions, decisions taken, and reports presented. 11.1.21. These minutes are to be made available to all MSA-Pakistan EBTO within two weeks of the end of the meeting. 11.1.22. The EBTO is responsible for adapting the minutes within one week of their availability to EBTO.
a. In the event that any member of the EBTO fails to adopt the EBM minutes within the specified time frame, the minutes shall be deemed as adopted.
11.1.23. Minutes are to be made available to all LCs within one week of their adoption.
11.1.24. Only the EB may allow other participants or observers to be present at EB meetings.
11.1.25. MSA-Pakistan Team of Officials shall be participants when allowed to be present.
11.1.26. Observers of EB meeting, if EB decides to open calls, can be: a. Any member of MSA-Pakistan b. Honorary Life Member(s) of MSA-Pakistan c. Any medical student(s) d. Invited guest(s) e. Member(s) from organization(s) in an official relation with MSA-Pakistan

f. External advisor(s) 11.1.27. Participants have both speaking and proposing
rights during the EB meeting. Observers have neither speaking nor proposing rights unless given by the Executive Board. 11.1.28. Upon request from one of the EB members, the EB has the right to ask other participants and observers to leave the meeting for one or more agenda points.

11.2. President:

11.2.1. Represent

MSA-Pakistan

to

external

partners/organizations and maintain contacts, in

conjunction with the VPE and other relevant

Officials.

11.2.2. Develop, through a consultative process involving

MSA-Pakistan Officials, short- and long-term

strategies for the work and structure of

MSA-Pakistan, especially in relation to external

organizations in conjunction with the relevant

officials, through a consultative process involving all

Local Councils.

11.2.3. Portal of communication between the EB and

MSA-Pakistan Supervising Council.

11.2.4. Maintain and promote contacts with Alumni

members of MSA-Pakistan

11.2.5. Represent MSA-Pakistan as the National President

in all International organizations.

11.2.6. Coordinate with the EB and the TOs

11.2.7. Call meetings of the EB and the TOs

11.2.8. Assist the VPI in supporting the LCs

11.2.9. Assist the VPE and VPF to raise funds for

MSA-Pakistan

11.2.10. Responsible for maintaining MSA-Pakistan

membership with International Bodies

11.2.11. Submit membership fee to maintain Membership

in time

11.2.12. Represent MSA-Pakistan in the Presidents' Sessions

and plenaries (or by proxy) in international General

Assemblies

11.2.13. Maintain the voting, speaking and proposing rights

of MSA-Pakistan in International Bodies

11.2.14. Clear all debts of MSA-Pakistan with International

Bodies.

11.2.15. In coordination with VPA, propose national activities

11.2.16. Propose changes to MSA-Pakistan constitution &

bylaws, Policy Documents, Programs, Meetings'

Minutes on behalf of MSA-Pakistan in NGA

meetings

11.2.17. In coordination with VPPRC, ensure publication of

national events and articles in Ascipius, MSA

Pakistan newsletters, and other related publications

11.3. Vice-President for Internal Affairs (VPI) 11.3.1. Be responsible for the sustainable and active

23

development of all Local Councils and Coordinator Institutes 11.3.2. Ensure smooth running of the Executive Board and Team of Officials 11.3.3. Send regular work and deadline reminders to all EBTO members 11.3.4. Actively coordinate with all the LCs' Presidents and Coordinators to enhance the functioning, sustainability, and involvement of all the LCs and CIs 11.3.5. Contact LC Presidents and Coordinators regularly and provide sufficient support and assistance to all LCs and CIs to ensure their survival in MSA-Pakistan 11.3.6. Develop a needs-assessment framework for the NMO and conduct it as soon as the term begins 11.3.7. Open calls for and select a Code of Conduct Committee 11.3.8. Develop and implement the national MSA-Pakistan Code of Conduct 11.3.9. Develop and implement an LC/CI Buddy System for the NMO 11.3.10. Develop an annual evaluation procedure and subsequent needs assessment for all LCs and CIs 11.3.11. Develop and implement a Mental Health Watch for the MSA-Pakistan EBTO 11.3.12. Work with the VPM to create and update the official MSA-Pakistan manual 11.3.13. Work with the VPM to establish contact with non-LC institutes and convince them to join and participate in MSA-Pakistan activities 11.3.14. Coordinate the activities of the Coordinator Institutes and help them in achieving official LC status. 11.3.15. VPI will be responsible for all conflict resolution amongst the EBTO and will be the first point of contact. If unresolved, VPI can inform the Supervising Council for further action. 11.3.16. VPI will be responsible for conflict resolution amongst the EBTO and LC Presidents and will be the first point of contact. If unresolved, VPI can inform the Supervising Council for further action.
11.4. Vice-President for External Affairs (VPE) 11.4.1. Coordinate with the EB & TO for matters regarding
External Representation 11.4.2. Develop and implement fundraising strategies for
MSA-Pakistan and be responsible for the development of the promotional material for MSA-Pakistan with the assistance of the VPPRC 11.4.3. Represent MSA-Pakistan in external relations and maintaining contacts, in conjunction with the Executive Board and other relevant MSA-Pakistan Officials 11.4.4. To coordinate with the VPF for the maintenance of financial documents concerning external partners

11.4.5. To coordinate with the VPF for long-term fundraising strategies for MSA-Pakistan activities and events, in conjunction with relevant MSA-Pakistan Officials
11.4.6. To be in constant touch with other national & international organizations, other external partners and national & international medical student bodies
11.4.7. Keep a tab on all the MOUs signed between MSA-Pakistan and other organizations and also to communicate regularly with those organizations
11.4.8. General Assembly delegation selection, APRM delegation selection, and external meetings delegation selection (March meeting & August meeting), to be approved by the VPE and the President
11.4.9. To coordinate and manage the external representation of the organization at various national and international meetings throughout the term, approved by the President
11.4.10. To archive and maintain databases of MOUs signed, Press Releases, Policy Documents, and promotional material
11.4.11. Work with the President and VPI toward registering MSA-Pakistan with the Government of Pakistan as an officially registered NGO
11.5. Vice-President for Activities (VPA) 11.5.1. Coordinate work related to activities with National
Officers and ensure timely enrollment and reporting of MSA-Pakistan activities Monitor National Officers for carrying out activities regularly, aiming for one national activity per month 11.5.2. Be the link between EB and all the MSA-Pakistan activities and international Body Programs' enrollment and reporting. 11.5.3. Archiving of all activities enrollments and reports and create/update Google Drive databases of the same 11.5.4. Maintenance of MSA-Pakistan activities database for activities conducted under all Standing Committees 11.5.5. Help MSA-Pakistan members and Standing Committees in designing, implementing and evaluating the impact of the activities and guide them in making an impact report 11.5.6. Receive regular reports of activities executed under all Standing Committees which includes information about activities conducted and future activities planned 11.5.7. Review and assess activities to ensure that they are in accordance with the basic protocols of planning and execution, including activity design, evaluation, and reporting. 11.5.8. Select appropriate national and local activities for recognition at international events, competitions,

24

and activity fairs.

11.5.9. Ensure all activities based Standing Committees are

motivated to apply to present their activities at the

General Assemblies and the Asia Pacific Regional

Meetings including but not limited to, Activities Fair,

Standing Committees' Activity Fairs and the Rex

Crossley Awards

11.5.10. To update and monitor databases related to

activities outreach, regional activities distribution,

certificates related databases (templates, requests,

reference numbers, PDFs), activity enrollments and

activities fair database

11.5.11. To process certificates within 15 days after receiving

a

request

from

the

Standing

Committee/MSA-Pakistan and send them to the

respective Standing Committees/ MSA-Pakistan

Official.

11.5.12. To guide and monitor any inter-Standing

Committee collaborations.

11.5.13. Coordinate with Standing Committees to create an

Annual Activities Impact Report.

11.5.14. Present an Annual Activities Impact Report for the

term at the NGA meeting.

11.5.15. Send the decision of acceptance, rejection, or

revision for an activity proposal submitted via the

National Enrollment Form within 14 days of

submission of the proposal

11.5.16. Support and facilitate activity coordinators in their

activities

11.5.17. Organize webinars, trainings, and workshops for

activity coordinators, local VPAs, and general

members

11.5.18. Collect and organize resources for activities from

online available resources.

11.5.19. Ensure the National Report Form is filled by the

local VPA(s) as soon as the activity is completed and

evaluated

11.5.20. Maintain international communication with the

international Bodies.

11.6. Vice-President for Capacity Building (VPCB) 11.6.1. Coordinate initiatives in leadership and skills
training and the development of human resources in MSA-Pakistan 11.6.2. Advise and support training programs or initiatives organized by all Local Councils 11.6.3. Share and upload all international/national training opportunities on all MSA-Pakistan social media handles and portals along with the assistance of VPE 11.6.4. Maintain National Trainer's Pool Advisory board and ensure that the National trainers and facilitators are registered in the MSA Trainers' Pool 11.6.5. Ensure all National trainers and facilitators update

their MSA Pakistan Trainers' Pool memberships annually 11.6.6. Develop the MSA-Pakistan Capacity Building Guidelines 11.6.7. Develop and coordinate the implementation of a Capacity Building Strategy in accordance to the CB Guidelines 11.6.8. Be responsible for the capacity building of MSA-Pakistan, and individual general members 11.6.9. Assure the capacity building flexibility towards different areas of intervention 11.6.10. Develop and maintain a monitoring and evaluation system to ensure the quality of capacity building activities, workshops, trainings, and resources 11.6.11. Create and maintain a database of MSA-Pakistan Trainers and Facilitators 11.6.12. Maintain and update the MSA-Pakistan training or capacity building resources database
11.7. Vice-President for Members (also serving as Secretary General)
11.7.1. Be responsible for maintaining contact between the members and the MSA-Pakistan EB
11.7.2. Be responsible for maintaining a record of the National Register of MSA-Pakistan.
11.7.3. Be responsible for maintaining the MSA-Pakistan LCs and CIs database which must include all important contact information
11.7.4. Be responsible for the administration, correspondence and archives of MSA-Pakistan
11.7.5. Work with the VPI to establish contact with non-LC institutes and convince them to join with their members and participate in MSA Pakistan activities
11.7.6. Collect the Annual Working Plan and Monthly/Quarterly/Yearly Reports from the MSA-Pakistan EBTO
11.7.7. Record and share the minutes of any MSA-Pakistan Officials meeting with the entire EBTO and the Supervising Council within a week of receiving them.
11.7.8. Work with the President and VPE toward the registration of MSA-Pakistan to the Government of Pakistan as the Secretary General of MSA-Pakistan.
11.7.9. Ensure the official Appointment Letters and Term Completion Letters are issued to all MSA-Pakistan Officials as well as Local Officers and maintain a referenced database of the same
11.7.10. Maintain an updated database of MSA Pakistan members, EBTO cabinets, and alumni
11.7.11. Maintain updated record of MSA-Pakistan memberships and facilitate new memberships of MSA-Pakistan

25

11.7.12. Be responsible as Secretary General for the functioning of the MSA-Pakistan National Secretariat
11.7.13. Update the MSA-Pakistan constitution & bylaws with the changes decided during the NGA meetings or special plenary sessions
11.7.14. Send out calls for and coordinate with the NGA Plenary Team as well as collect the plenary minutes to share with the EBTO and Supervising Council
11.7.15. Open calls for the NGA Organizing Committee and announce the schedule of the NGA
11.7.16. Prepare and send out invitations, provisional agenda, and other relevant information concerning NGA meetings of MSA-Pakistan
11.7.17. Send out calls for MSA-Pakistan National Small Working Groups and coordinate with national coordinators for the same
11.7.18. Informs LCs and CIs whose membership status has been changed, immediately after the National General Assembly meeting at which this change was voted upon.
11.8. Vice-President for Finances (VPF) 11.8.1. Be responsible for the financial administration and
book-keeping of MSA-Pakistan 11.8.2. Collect membership fees from all the Local Councils
and Coordinator Institutes and keep a record of the same 11.8.3. Collect the new MSA-Pakistan membership details and update and maintain the MSA-Pakistan membership database along with the VPI 11.8.4. Share details of the new memberships with assistance of the VPI every month with the Executive Board 11.8.5. Be responsible for the official bank accounts of MSA-Pakistan 11.8.6. Present an adequate report, as decided by the Executive Board, on the financial situation of MSA-Pakistan at every Executive Board meeting 11.8.7. At the end of the financial year, the annual financial report must be submitted and presented to the LC presidents, CI Coordinators, HOD, EBTO & Supervising Council at the National General Assembly. If no report is received, the matter is referred to the Supervising Council 11.8.8. Present a list of Local Councils having debts to MSA-Pakistan to the EB and Supervising Council. 11.8.9. Deliver receipts received during his/her term to the operational office at the end of their term 11.8.10. Develop and implement fundraising strategies for MSA-Pakistan along with the assistance of the VPE 11.8.11. Collect and review financial reports of each Local Council after every 2 months with the assistance of

the Executive Board 11.8.12. Review the budgets of all activity proposals and give
the decision for the approval, rejection or revision to the VPA and the local VPA or local VPF 11.8.13. Assist local VPAs and local VPFs in formulating budgets for their activities 11.8.14. Conduct trainings with assistance of VPCB for the financial sustainability of Local Councils and for capacity building of local VPFs in financial management 11.8.15. A decision of the EB can be overruled by the Supervising Council for the following important reasons:
a. When the decision will result in an illegal or criminal offense
b. When the decision violates the MSA-Pakistan constitution & bylaws.
c. When the decision is beyond their mandate as specified in the MSA-Pakistan constitution & bylaws.
11.9. Vice-President for Public Relations & Communication (VPPRC)
11.9.1. Develop and implement a strategy for the promotion of MSA-Pakistan and its work in accordance with the PRC Guidelines
11.9.2. Be responsible for the public relations and mass media contacts of MSA-Pakistan
11.9.3. Be the primary editor of MSA-Pakistan publications 11.9.4. Provision of creative & promotional material such as
graphics, video, publications etc. for official activities of Standing Committees & EB as & when required as per the PRC Guidelines 11.9.5. Design letters / letterheads / certificates / digital certificates / letters of acknowledgement and recommendations / online material to be sent to members 11.9.6. Assist other officials in the creation of other publications like Activities' Fair and Exchanges' Fair posters etc. and merchandising like badges, stickers etc. to be used at international and national meetings 11.9.7. Coordinate the content and use of online communication channels like social media as well as the MSA-Pakistan website 11.9.8. Work with VPI to develop, update, and regulate the use of the MSA-Pakistan Corporate Identity 11.9.9. Development and operation of all official MSA Pakistan internet portals including: Website, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Instagram, LinkedIn, Linktree, and Issuu
11.10. Suspension, removal and resignation of Officials 11.10.1. MSA-Pakistan Officials shall be suspended from

26

their functions or removed from office by the Supervising Council for the following important reasons: a) Fraud b) Committing a criminal offense c) Malfunction of office d) Inability to fulfill duties for a period longer than
2 months, without prior notice to the EB and SupCo e) Breaking the constitution & bylaws f) Deliberately working against decisions of the EBTO g) Failing to communicate with the organizational bodies h) Refusing to report i) Vote of No Confidence with 2/3rd majority
11.11. Procedure for termination of Officials 11.11.1. All complaints against MSA-Pakistan Officials must
be filed with the VPI office and made through proper channel i.e first to the VPI and in case the VPI deems it fit, he/she shall forward the complaint to the Supervising Council after taking the President in confidence. 11.11.2. Any complaints filed without the proper channel will be discarded. 11.11.3. In the event of a complaint received by the Supervising Council against an MSA-Pakistan Official on grounds listed in bylaws § 11.10.1, the Supervising Council will investigate, within a defined period the complaint or immediately delegate the investigation to the Executive Board. 11.11.4. In the event that the Supervising Council determines that an Official has committed the offenses described in bylaws § 11.10.1 the Supervising Council shall present a thorough report of the investigation to the EBTO and the decision of termination will be voted upon by the Executive Board and Team of Officials, in person or online. 11.11.5. The Official will be terminated after a vote of the EBTO having at least 2/3rd majority. 11.11.6. The Official subject to investigation and the proposer of the investigation cannot be a part of the investigating body. 11.11.7. Upon termination of an Official, they shall return all funds allocated by MSA-Pakistan to them, which have not been used. Furthermore they shall not receive any more reimbursements or be given further funding. 11.11.8. The investigation report that results in the termination of any EBTO member shall be presented during a President's session.
a. A session with a single-point agenda shall be convened within one week of the

EBTO's decision, and the report shall be deemed valid upon receiving a two-thirds majority in the Presidential session. b. Each President and Coordinator shall possess one vote. 11.12. Procedure for resignation of Officials 11.12.1. MSA-Pakistan Officials can resign by sending in their letter of resignation via email to the President and VPI with a notice period of at least 2 weeks. 11.12.2. The VPI must inform the EBTO, Supervising Council and MSA-Pakistan members about the resignation and ensure that work is reassigned to ensure the smooth functioning of the organization. 11.12.3. Upon the resignation of the Official, their email access to all documents related to MSA-Pakistan in their capacity as the MSA-Pakistan Official must be revoked by the VPI. They must also be removed from all channels of informal and formal communication and databases listing them as an MSA-Pakistan Official.
11.13. Procedure for Vote of No Confidence (VoNC) 11.13.1. A vote of no confidence (VoNC) against any EBTO
member or SupCo can be initiated by three LC Presidents officially via email. 11.13.2. The motion of the Vote of No Confidence (VoNC) can be initiated at any time during the term by three LC Presidents in unanimous agreement for the VoNC. 11.13.3. The motion for the VoNC needs to be submitted by one of the three LC's official email ID via email at supco@msapakistan.org. 11.13.4. The email for initiating the VoNC must be submitted to supco@msapakistan.org with the details of the motion including the three LCs in agreement to initiate it as well as the explanation for initiating it. 11.13.5. The motion for VoNC will only go forward and be voted upon if approved or rejected by the Supervising Council within one week of receiving VoNC;
a. If a Vote of No Confidence (VoNC) is initiated against any of the Supervising Council members (SupCos), the remaining SupCos will collectively decide on the matter, and the implicated SupCo shall abstain from participating in the decision-making process.
b. In the event that there are no other SupCos left to participate in the decision-making process, the VoNC shall be deemed valid and set for voting automatically.
c. Failure to carry out the procedure outlined in bylaws § 10.13.1 (b) will result in the automatic removal of the SupCo against which the VoNC was initiated.,

27

11.13.6. If approved, the motion will go forward and be sent by the Supervising Council to all the LC Presidents to vote upon.
11.13.7. Only if the motion receives 2/3rd majority in favour of itself, the particular EBTO member will be immediately removed from office.
11.13.8. Only Permanent and Temporary LC Presidents will have voting rights for VoNCs. Candidate LCs and Coordinator Institutes do not have any voting rights for VoNCs.
11.13.9. Each Permanent and Temporary LC will have 1 vote each (through the President) for each VoNC.
11.14. Replacement of vacant MSA-Pakistan Official positions
11.14.1. In the absence, suspension, removal, resignation, or death of an EBTO member, the rest of the members of the Executive Board and the Team of Officials may decide either to redistribute tasks amongst themselves, or to have a special election for that position. This decision can only be made during a special General Assembly (SGA), either in person or online, the results of which should be informed to the members on all social media handles.
11.14.2. In the event that the Executive Board and the Team of Officials take the decision to have a special election for a vacant position at a Special General Assembly, the elected candidate will assume office immediately upon election and will fulfill only the remainder of the current term.
12. DUTIES OF THE TEAM OF OFFICIALS 12.1. Standing Committees 12.1.1. Definition: a Standing Committee works to benefit
a specific field of interest 12.1.2. The MSA-Pakistan Standing Committees are:
a. Standing Committee on Public Health (SCOPH)
b. Standing Committee on Sexual and Reproductive Health and Rights including HIV & AIDS (SCORA)
c. Standing Committee on Medical Education (SCOME)
d. Standing Committee on human Rights and Peace (SCORP)
e. Standing Committee on Professional Exchange (SCOPE)
f. Standing Committee on Research Exchange (SCORE)
12.1.3. Any member of MSA-Pakistan can participate in any of the Standing Committees and their initiatives such as activities and workshops at their will.
12.1.4. Requirements for maintaining membership in Standing Committees are defined in the relevant

MSA-Pakistan Standing Committee Regulations. All

members of a Standing Committee must abide by

the Standing Committees Regulations at all times

to avoid their membership being revoked from that

particular Standing Committee.

12.1.5. To create a new Standing Committee of

MSA-Pakistan, a proposal to establish a new

Standing Committee must be submitted before the

National General Assembly. At least six (6)

Permanent LCs must agree to and announce, in this

proposal, their interest and active participation in

the Standing Committee in question. The National

General Assembly will decide about this proposal

with a two-thirds majority.

12.1.6. The National General Assembly can decide to

dissolve, change the activities, or change the name

of a Standing Committee. Such a decision needs at

least two-thirds majority.

12.1.7. MSA-Pakistan National Officers of all Standing

Committees must attend the National General

Assembly Meetings.

12.1.8. The Standing Committee meets once during the

National General Assembly Meetings. The Standing

Committee meets at least twice a year.

12.1.9. The Standing Committee meeting is the decision

making body of the respective Standing Committee.

12.1.10. The objectives of a Standing Committee meeting

are:

a. To run activities with concrete plans of

action,

coordination and working

strategies.

d) To report their activities back to the

MSA-Pakistan's leaders.

e) To discuss possible changes to the

Standing Committee Regulations and vote

upon them.

12.2. Duties of the National Officers (NPO, NORA, NORP, NOME, NORE, NEO):
12.2.1. Attending all NGA meetings, national meetings, and workshops
12.2.2. Representing MSA-Pakistan externally (after approval by the concerned EB member)
12.2.3. Coordinating with and updating the Executive Board members in the concerned area of work or respective Standing Committee
12.2.4. Reporting to the VPA for anything that concerns activity design, implementation, evaluation and presentation including issuing of certificates and inter-Standing Committee collaborations
12.2.5. Reporting to VPI for anything concerning memberships, issuing letters for appointment and term completion, OLMs, NSWGs, Annual Working Plans and Monthly/Annual Reports

28

12.2.6. Reporting to the VPCB for capacity building initiatives like trainings, workshops and induction
12.2.7. Reporting to the VPF with budget reports and finance related initiatives
12.2.8. Reporting to the VPE for external representation work including framing policy statements and external partnerships as well as to bring support funds for activities
12.2.9. Reporting to the President in case of any conflict or complaint as well as general updates
12.2.10. Keeping confidential all the sensitive information discussed within the EBTO
12.2.11. Providing an appropriate and thorough handover to their successors for an easy leadership transition
12.2.12. Ensure all criteria to maintain the active status of the SC in the respective NMO, set by International Body Standing Committee Directors & International Teams, are fulfilled
12.2.13. Help, support and communicate regularly with Local Officers of respective Standing Committees along with capacity building initiatives to train them
12.2.14. Thoroughly support and facilitate the activity coordinators of LC in their activities falling under the respective Standing Committee in coordination with local VPAs
12.2.15. Communicate and network with Standing Committee National Officers and Liaison of other NMOs
12.2.16. Be responsible for all of the communication with the respective international Body Standing Committee Regional Assistant for Asia-Pacific..
12.2.17. Submit international reports on time and regularly attend OLMs scheduled by international Body Standing Committee Regional Assistants
12.2.18. Develop and manage MSA-Pakistan Standing Committees' handles on Facebook and other platforms
12.2.19. Maintain record of activities of respective Standing Committee of all local councils
12.2.20. Create resource material on Standing Committees and organize trainings in correspondence with the VPCB for new members' orientation
13. ELECTIONS 13.1. The MSA-Pakistan Executive Board and Team of
Officials shall be elected every one (1) year at the National General Assembly (NGA) / Online National General Assembly(OGA)/ Special General Assembly (SGA) 13.2. The MSA-Pakistan SupCos shall be elected every one (1) year at the National General Assembly (NGA) / Online National General Assembly/ Special General Assembly (SGA)

13.3. Eligibility criteria for candidates for MSA-Pakistan President: a. Must be a registered member of MSA-Pakistan for at least 2 years and currently a medical student or within 1 year of graduation (MBBS only). b. Must be familiar with MSA-Pakistan structure and functioning. c. Must be an activity coordinator of at least one MSA-Pakistan activity. d. Must be able to work on social media and internet platforms including Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, Linktree, LinkedIn, YouTube, Discord, and Issuu e. Must have regular access to internet and emails f. Must have good English writing and speaking skills g. Must be available for online and physical meetings h. Must have participated actively MSA-Pakistan activities and trainings i. Must have attended at least two previous NGA meetings j. Must be motivated and devoted towards their job k. Must have a sense of time management l. Must not have had any disciplinary action taken against him/her by the candidate's medical school or by MSA-Pakistan m. Must have worked in their Local Council's EB or TOs for at least 1 term as a post holder during their MSA-Pakistan membership (this is to demonstrate leadership qualities). n. Must be part of the MSA-Pakistan EB o. Should have plans to attend both international General Assemblies during their term p. Should have preferably attended at least one international General Assembly.
13.4. Eligibility criteria for candidates for MSA-Pakistan VPI, VPE, VPA, VPCB, VPM and VPF: In addition to general eligibility criterias a. Must be a registered member of MSA-Pakistan for at least 1 year and currently a medical/dental/Allied health sciences/postgraduate medical student or within 12 months of graduation from their course. b. Must be familiar with MSA-Pakistan structure and functioning.

29

c. Must be an activity coordinator of at least one MSA_Pakistan activity.
d. Must be able to work on social media and internet platforms including Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, Linktree, LinkedIn, YouTube, Discord, and Issuu
e. Must have regular access to internet and emails
f. Must have good English writing and speaking skills
g. Must be available for online and physical meetings
h. Must have participated actively MSA-Pakistan activities and trainings
i. Must have attended at least one previous NGA meeting
j. Must be motivated and devoted towards their job
k. Must have a sense of time management l. Must not have had any disciplinary action
taken against him/her by the candidate's medical school or by MSA-Pakistan m. Must have worked in their Local Council's EB or TOs for at least 1 term as a post holder during their MSA-Pakistan membership (this is to demonstrate leadership qualities). n. Should have plans to attend at least one international General Assembly during their term
13.5. Specific criteria only for the post of VPF: In addition to general eligibility criterias a. Must be good in handling finances and bookkeeping b. Must have an active Pakistani bank account with an active online app.
13.6. Specific criteria only for the post of VPCB: In addition to general eligibility criterias a. Must have attended at least one international MSA-Pakistan certified training b. Must be a part of the MSA-Pakistan Trainers' Pool as a trainer
13.7. Specific criteria only for the post of VPPRC: In addition to general eligibility criterias a. Candidates for the position of VPPRC must be coordinator of at least one MSA-Pakistan activity. b. Must be able to work on social media and internet platforms including Facebook,

Twitter, Instagram, Linktree, LinkedIn, YouTube, Discord, and Issuu c. Must have regular access to internet and emails d. Must have good English writing and speaking skills

13.8. Eligibility criteria for candidates for all

MSA-Pakistan Team of Officials (NORA, NPO,

NORP, NOME, NEO, and NORE):

13.8.1. A person applying for the post of national officer

a. Must be a member of MSA-Pakistan for at

least 1 year and currently a

medical/dental/Allied

health

sciences/postgraduate medical student or

within 12 months of graduation from their

course.

b. Must be familiar with MSA-Pakistan

structure and functioning.

c. Must be coordinator of at least one

MSA-Pakistan activity related to the

MSA-Pakistan Standing Committee

position the candidate is applying for.

d. Must be able to work on social media and

internet platforms including Facebook,

Twitter, Instagram, Linktree, LinkedIn,

YouTube, Discord, and Issuu

e. Must have regular access to internet and

emails

f. Must be available for online and physical

meetings

g. Must have participated actively

MSA-Pakistan activities and trainings

h. Must have attended at least one previous

NGA meeting

i. Must be motivated and devoted towards

their job

j. Must have a sense of time management

k. Must not have had any disciplinary action

taken against him/her by the candidate's

medical school or by MSA-Pakistan

l. Must have worked in their Local Council's

EB or TOs for at least 1 term as a post

holder during their MSA-Pakistan

Membership (this is to demonstrate

leadership qualities).

m. Should have plans to attend at least one

international General Assembly during

their term

13.8.2. The candidates should apply by filling designated

online form with Application form (Contain CV,

Motivation letter, and Plan of Action), Technical

Datacard, Proof of enrolment, and Credential page

of Passport or Both Side of CNIC and sending All

30

submitted documents via email at

vpm@msapakistan.org

cc'd

to

president@msapakistan.org, ecb@msapakistan.org,

and plenary@msapakistan.org according to the set

deadline in the official call for the EBTO

13.8.3. The valid candidatures are shared publicly by the

CCC. The candidates may distribute their

candidature to the members.

13.9. Voting 13.9.1. The voting shall happen at the National General
Assembly/Online National General Assembly/ Special General Assembly (SGA), , through a secret ballot/online voting. The numerical results are counted by the Supervising Council. 13.9.2. The results of the voting shall be announced at the respective National General Assembly/Online National General Assembly/ Special General Assembly (SGA),. 13.9.3. A second independent counting of votes can be asked for by any candidate and will only be conducted if the Supervising Council determines a need for it. 13.9.4. The voting slips should be sealed and kept at the registered office for a period of six (6) months. In case of an online election, the results must be saved on the Official MSA-Pakistan drive i.e president.msap@gmail.com for the period of six (6) months. 13.9.5. All MSA-Pakistan EBTO/SupCo are elected by an absolute majority as defined in bylaws § 8.4.5. 13.9.6. The elected EBTO/SupCo shall hold office from October 1st to September 30th of the next year, the same could be extended to a maximum of 2 months during which the new elections happen and also the existing EBTO will help in the handover process. 13.9.7. Any EB member will cease to hold office
a. At the end of their term b. By a written resignation with a two-weeks
notice c. By their death d. By removal from office by court in cases
provided for in law e. By removal from office as described under
bylaws § 11.10 f. By removal from office through a no
confidence motion 13.9.8. In any unforeseen circumstances, an online special
general assembly (SGA) can be called to elect/replace EBTO members after taking permission from the Supervising Council and informing members of MSA-Pakistan about the same.

14. PUBLIC RELATIONS & COMMUNICATION 14.1. Corporate Identity 14.1.1. The Association shall sue and be sued by its name. 14.1.2. The official MSA-Pakistan Corporate Identity is
defined in the official MSA-Pakistan Brand Manual. 14.1.3. The official MSA-Pakistan Brand Manual should be
presented and adopted during the annual NGA even if no changes have been made. 14.1.4. Only the MSA-Pakistan Corporate Identity can be used for all promotional material for MSA-Pakistan. Changes in layout or any other additions are not allowed. 14.1.5. The official MSA-Pakistan Corporate Identity can only be used by the MSA-Pakistan Local Councils, Coordinator Institutes, EBTO, National Teams, and Officials. 14.1.6. MSA-Pakistan Local Councils and Coordinator Institutes can only use the official MSA-Pakistan LC/CI logo provided by the VPPRC office. The use of the official MSA-Pakistan logo has to be according to the official MSA-Pakistan Brand Manual.
14.2. Publications 14.2.1. All printed & digital publications (e.g., leaflets,
pamphlets, booklets) must be approved by the VPPRC before being distributed. 14.2.2. All materials written in the name of MSA Pakistan must be written on official MSA Pakistan Stationery and approved by the Executive Board. 14.2.3. Advertisements can occur in any printed MSA-Pakistan material except on the MSA-Pakistan stationery. 14.2.4. Advertisements in any printed material including the newsletters and magazine/journal of MSA-Pakistan shall be approved by the Executive Board. 14.2.5. The official MSA-Pakistan stationery can only be used by MSA-Pakistan Officials unless otherwise specified by the Executive Board.
14.3. Online Communication Channels 14.3.1. MSA-Pakistan has several online communication
channels described in the MSA-Pakistan Brand Manual. 15. FINANCES 15.1. Generel 15.1.1. The official currency of the Association is the Pakistani Rupee (PKR or Rs). 15.1.2. MSA-Pakistan treasury consists of the membership fees, any sponsorships, grants, scholarships and awards granted to MSA-Pakistan. 15.1.3. The MSA-Pakistan treasury will be in the bank account declared by the MSA-Pakistan President. 15.1.4. All the transactions of MSA-Pakistan have to be

31

reviewed by the MSA-Pakistan vice president for finances approved by the EBTO with at least  Majority. 15.1.5. All the transactions should be updated in the MSA-Pakistan Financial Database as soon as these are executed. 15.1.6. The MSA-Pakistan Financial Database will have two parts:
a. Income b. Expenditure 15.1.7. Each part of the Financial Database will declare the amount of funds, the beneficiary, the benefactor, the reason of funds transfer and the receipt of funds transfer. 15.1.8. The Supervising Council will have access to the Financial Database all the time. 15.1.9. The annual report of the VPF along with the Financial Database will be presented at the NGA meeting for adoption and submitted according to Annex 1. 15.1.10. The finances of the LCs & Coordinator Institutes will be regulated according to Annex 1. 15.1.11. Membership reports of LCs and CIs will not be accepted until finances have been transferred to the national treasury. 15.1.12. A sum of PKR 10,000 (32 EUROs) whichever is lesser will be deducted from the finances of each Permanent or Temporary Local Council (LC) and declared to the LCs and CIs. The sum of all the deductions will be strictly used to pay membership fee of MSA-Pakistan and for administrative expenditures. These funds will cover the website cost, tour of the EBTO to LCs and Coordinator Institutes, National General Assembly costs, printing promotional material of MSA-Pakistan and other related expenditures. 15.1.13. A sum of PKR 8,000 (26 EUROs) , whichever is lesser, will be deducted from the finances of each Candidate Local Council (LC) and declared to the LCs and CIs. The sum of all the deductions will be strictly used to pay membership fee of MSA-Pakistan and for administrative expenditures. These funds will cover the website cost, tour of the EBTO to LCs and Coordinator Institutes, National General Assembly costs, printing promotional material of MSA-Pakistan and other related expenditures. 15.1.14. A sum of PKR 6,000 (19 EUROs), whichever is lesser, will be deducted from the finances of each Coordinator Institute (CI) and declared to the LCs and CIs. The sum of all the deductions will be strictly used to pay membership fee of MSA-Pakistan and for administrative expenditures. These funds will cover the website cost, tour of the EBTO to LCs and

Coordinator Institutes, National General Assembly costs, printing promotional material of MSA-Pakistan and other related expenditures. 15.1.15. 1The EB will produce a bimonthly financial report to be presented to all the LCs and CIs. 15.1.16. An end of term financial report should also be generated by the VPF and made public. This end term financial report will also be adopted at the NGA meeting. 15.1.17. The budget for an LC's or CI's activity would be approved by the National VPF after consultation with the National President and VPA and reviewing the activity and its impact. The approval would be made through email to the official Local VPA email and the budget would be transferred to the Local VPF's bank account registered officially in the database only. 15.1.18. The funds for activities will only be transferred to the LCs, Coordinators, and EBTO members if they have submitted the National Enrollment Form (NEF) for Activities and the budget for the respective activity has been approved by the National VPF and National President. 15.1.19. The financial year of the Association shall be from October 1st to September 30th of the following calendar year with respect to the term start and end dates for the EBTO. 15.1.20. The funds of the Association shall be in the control of the MSA-Pakistan President, Supervising Council, and VPF. 15.1.21. The MSA-Pakistan President, Supervising Council, and VPF will have independent authority over the bank account and transactions.
15.2. Budget Approval Procedure 15.2.1. The Vice-President for Finances (VPF), in
consultation with the Executive Board, shall draft an annual budget detailing expected income sources and expenditures. 15.2.2. The draft budget must be submitted to the Supervising Council at least four weeks before the National General Assembly (NGA). 15.2.3. The Supervising Council shall review and suggest modifications to ensure compliance with the organization's goals and financial sustainability. 15.2.4. The final budget shall be presented to the NGA for approval by a simple majority vote.
15.3. Reporting Procedure 15.3.1. The VPF shall prepare quarterly financial reports
detailing: a. Income sources and amounts. b. Itemized expenses. c. Account balances.

32

d. Any outstanding debts or obligations. 15.3.2. Annual financial reports, including audited financial
statements, must be submitted to the NGA. 15.3.3. All reports shall be archived for five years and made
available to members upon request.
15.4. Transaction and Withdrawal Procedure 15.4.1. The Vice-President for Finances (VPF) is authorized
to approve budgets up to PKR 5,000/- for routine expenditures. 15.4.2. The President may authorize budgets up to PKR 15,000/- for operational needs, provided such transactions align with the organizational objectives and financial policies. 15.4.3. All financial transactions exceeding PKR 15,000/must be approved by the Executive Board through a two-thirds (2/3) majority vote, ensuring democratic oversight and accountability. 15.4.4. Withdrawals require dual signatories, which must include the President and the VPF or their officially designated representatives, to safeguard financial transparency and prevent misuse. 15.4.5. Each transaction must be fully documented, and receipts or proof of transaction must be emailed to the VPF at vpf@msapakistan.org with a copy sent to president@msapakistan.org for record-keeping and audit purposes. 15.4.6. In case of emergencies, the Supervising Council is authorized to approve transactions with immediate effect. Documentation of such approvals, along with transaction details, must be submitted to the NGA for review and ratification at the earliest opportunity.
15.5. Sponsorships 15.5.1. A sponsorship is considered an agreement between
MSA-Pakistan and one or more parties, for whom the association offers advertising opportunities in return for liquid financial resources. Grants from nonprofit making and (inter)governmental organizations are not considered sponsorships. 15.5.2. The EB may negotiate sponsorship agreements on behalf of the Association which are in line with the MSA Pak Ethical Framework on Fundraising. 15.5.3. Sponsorship agreements must honor the autonomy of the Association. 15.5.4. The sponsorship record shall be created with proper proposal documentation by the VPF. The sponsorship income and expense shall be shared with the EB and Supervising Council for accountability purposes.
16. ACTIVITIES 16.1. All activities should be proposed via the NEF for at
least 14 days.

16.2. MSA-Pakistan Activities should be proposed and enrolled through the National Enrollment Form (NEF) disseminated by the National VPA and his/her team, prior to the start date of the activity.
16.3. Activities should be proposed and enrolled via the NEF which must be filled through the official Local VPA email of the respective LC or CI.
16.4. Activities can not be promoted without the approval of the National VPA sent via email to the Local VPA.
16.5. An MSA-Pakistan activity can have a maximum of 3 Activity Coordinators.
16.6. An activity with Activity Coordinators from one LC or an activity which is a collaboration of up to 2 Local Councils will be considered a local activity.
16.7. An activity with at least one Activity Coordinator who is a member of the MSA-Pakistan EBTO or an activity which is a collaboration of at least 3 or more Local Councils with the relevant MSA-Pakistan EBTO member on board or an activity proposed by an MSA-Pakistan National Team will be considered national activity.
16.8. An activity which is a collaboration between 2 NMOs in the same region (e.g. MSA-Pakistan and MSAI India in the Asia-Pacific region) will be considered a regional activity.
16.9. An activity which is a collaboration between Organization in different regions (e.g. MSA-Pakistan and ANEM Portugal) will be considered an international activity.
16.10. National certificates signed and stamped by the National VPM and VPA will only be issued to the Activity Coordinators after the activity has been successfully reported via the NRF.
16.11. Activities must be reported after the successful conduction and conclusion of the activity through the National Report Form (NRF) disseminated by the National VPA and his/her team.
16.12. Activities should be reported after the conclusion of the activity via the NRF which must be filled through the official Local VPA email of the respective LC or CI.
16.13. National certificates signed and stamped by the National VPM and VPA will not be issued if the activity will not be reported within the same term during which it was proposed and enrolled.
16.14. Activities requiring a budget from the national treasury will only be approved by the National VPA after the budget is reviewed and approved by National VPF and National President.
17. constitution & bylaws & AMENDMENTS TO THE constitution & bylaws
17.1. MSA-Pakistan will function according to the constitution & bylaws . Any disputes arising in the

33

association will be resolved based upon constitution & bylaws Amendments and changes to the constitution & bylaws have to be decided as per the procedure laid down in this section. 17.1.1. The constitution & bylaws comprise of the chief protocols with respect to the functioning of MSA-Pakistan and in case of conflict with Internal Operating Guidelines or other guidelines, the constitution & bylaws are to be followed. 17.1.2. Amendments to the MSA-Pakistan constitution & bylaws can be made at the National General Assembly or Special General Assembly; at a meeting in which we have quorum present.
17.2. Bylaw Change Proposals (BCPs) 17.2.1. A proposal to change the constitution & bylaws
(bylaw change proposal or BCP) must be submitted by the MSA-Pakistan Supervising Council or the MSA-Pakistan EBTO or by two Permanent Local Councils in accordance with annex 1. 17.2.2. The proposer has to submit the BCP with the proposed changes at least 3 weeks before NGA, before the Plenary Chair and EB in the form of a regular motion. 17.2.3. Any changes to the bylaws shall be exclusively discussed and voted on under the point of the agenda "Changes to the constitution & bylaws". This point cannot be reopened during the same General Assembly Meeting. 17.2.4. All grammatical and renumbering changes to the constitution & bylaws can be proposed by the MSA Pakistan EBTO. A report listing all the proposed changes will be presented at the National General Assembly Meeting for adoption. Upon adoption of the report, the Vice-president for members (also serving as general secretary) can make the changes. 17.2.5. The EB, Supervising Council, and CCC shall explain the legal consequences of this change to the NGA. This explanation can be presented by any or as many members of these three bodies as needed, and not necessarily only by the Change Approvers. 17.2.6. All bylaw change proposals require a two-thirds () majority to be accepted. 17.2.7. Changes to the constitution & bylaws will take effect immediately after the National General Assembly unless otherwise specified in the proposal. 17.2.8. Any changes to the constitution & bylaws shall be exclusively discussed and voted on under the point of the agenda "Changes to the constitution & bylaws ". This point cannot be reopened during the same NGA. 17.2.9. All grammatical and renumbering changes to the constitution & bylaws § can be done by the MSA-Pakistan VPM, without changing the meaning,

between the MSA-Pakistan NGAs. These changes should be sent to the MSA-Pakistan SupCo, EBTO, LCs, and CIs within 5 working days of the change. A report listing all the suggested changes will be presented at the NGA for adoption by the VPM. Upon adoption of the report, the VPM can make the changes permanent.

17.3. Suspension of constitution & bylaws

17.3.1. A proposal to suspend a paragraph of Constitution

bylaws shall be called bylaws suspension proposal

(BSP) shall be done through a procedural motion

that needs to be proposed by at least two Local

councils.

17.3.2. Each Proposal shall be limited to a single paragraph

or a single list item

17.3.3. The proposers should justify in writing and orally:

a) why the Paragraph of constitution & bylaws

was not observed,

b) why the Paragraph of constitution & bylaws

needs to be suspended,

c) how suspending the paragraph

of

constitution & bylaws is going to solve the

issue

d) Paragraph of constitution & bylaws ruling the

suspension of bylaws cannot be suspended.

17.4. Other Regulations

17.4.1. In order to regulate the practical internal

management of the Association, the EBTO can have

Internal Operating Guidelines (IOGs). All Guidelines

have to comply with the MSA-Pakistan constitution

& bylaws. They are decided by the MSA-Pakistan

EBTO and are to be shared with LCs and CIs

immediately after being amended.

18. ALUMNI & ALUMNI COUNCIL 18.1. An MSA-Pakistan Alumnus is defined as an
individual who was active in the past work of the organization, positively influenced it and contributed to its development, sustainability and visibility. Any individual suspended shall not be considered an MSA-Pakistan Alumnus. 18.2. Members of the Executive Board, Team of Officials and Supervising Council who successfully complete their term will automatically be considered as MSA-Pakistan Alumni. 18.3. MSA-Pakistan Alumni are automatically considered Honorary MSA-Pakistan lifetime members. 18.4. The President of MSA-Pakistan is the official point of contact with the MSA-Pakistan Alumni. 18.5. The EBTO will select from amongst the Alumni, the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of the MSA-Pakistan Alumni Council. 18.6. The opportunities and duties of the MSA-Pakistan

34
Alumni Council are described in the MSA-Pakistan Alumni Engagement Strategy.
19. DISSOLUTION 19.1. The Association may be dissolved voluntarily at a
National General Assembly of its members if the Association passes a resolution by a two-third majority requiring its dissolution and the resolution is confirmed at a subsequent National General Meeting called together for that purpose. 19.2. A proposal for the dissolution shall be sent to all MSA-Pakistan members at least three (3) months before the National General Assembly meeting. The proposal shall be sent via email. 19.3. Any assets/funds of MSA-Pakistan at the conclusion of the dissolution shall be passed on to an institution of general benefit in accordance with the objectives of MSA-Pakistan.

35

ANNEXURES

TASK
1.1 Executive Board & Team of Officials' candidatures
1.2 Other Officials' candidatures
1.3 Interim Officials' candidatures
1.4 Next NGA host candidatures
1.5 LCs' Change of Status applications
1.6 constitution & bylaws' Change Proposals
1.7 Policy Statement Proposals' Feedback Call
1.8 Amendments to Policy Statement Proposals
1.9 Memoranda of Understanding (MoU)
proposals
1.10 Previous NGA Minutes & Financial Report
1.11 Draft sponsorship agreements
1.12 LCs' and CIs' Annual Reports
1.13 Update LC/CI info in database Form opens &
Form closes
1.14 Memberships' fee transfer

ANNEX 1 SUBMISSION 3 weeks before NGA

SHARED 2 weeks before NGA

2 weeks before NGA

1 week before NGA

Until 4 weeks after NGA

2 weeks before NGA

1 week before NGA

2 weeks before NGA

1 week before NGA

3 weeks before NGA

2 weeks before NGA

3 weeks before NGA

2 weeks before NGA

2 weeks before NGA

1 week before NGA

2 weeks before NGA

1 week before NGA

2 weeks before NGA 2 weeks before NGA 2 weeks before NGA 2 weeks before NGA

1 week before NGA 1 week before NGA 1 week before NGA 1 week before NGA

By the 10th of each month.

36

1.15 LCs' and CIs' Bimonthly Membership List Update

1st day of every second month

1st seven (7) days of every second month

SPECIFIC FOR MSA-PAKISTAN OFFICIALS

1.16 Supervising Council Annual Report

2 weeks before NGA

1.17 VPI Report on LCs' Change of Status applications

1 week before NGA

1.18 MSA-Pakistan EBTO Annual Reports

3 weeks before NGA

1.19 MSA-Pakistan EB Report on Policy Statements

2 weeks before NGA

1.20 MSA-Pakistan Annual Financial Report/Statement

2 weeks before NGA

1.21 MSA-Pakistan EBTO Monthly Reports

2nd day of every month

1.22 MSA-Pakistan Interim Officials' Monthly Reports

2nd day of every month

1.23 Reimbursement claims due

2 weeks before NGA

1.24 Updated version of MSA-Pakistan constitution
& bylaws post-NGA

Within 1 week after NGA

1.25 Monthly MSA-Pakistan Financial Report/Database

Within 1st week of every month

1 week before NGA At NGA
2 weeks before NGA 2 weeks before NGA 2 weeks before NGA 4th day of every month 4th day of every month
Within 2 weeks after NGA Within 1st week of every month

ANNEX 2 Division of voting rights during the National General Assembly:

Status

Plenary

Elections

2.1 Permanent LC

1

10 (maximum)

2.2 Temporary LC

1

10 (maximum)

2.3 Candidate LC

0

1

2.4Coordinator

0

1

nstitute (CI)

37

2.5 Maintenance of voting rights of an institute: a. Submission of Annual LC/CI Report 2 weeks before the NGA (in accordance with Annex 1). b. Transfer of all Membership fees to the National Treasury in accordance with Annex 1. c. Transfer of all pending Membership fees to the National Treasury 2 weeks before the NGA. d. Submission of Bimonthly Membership Reports in accordance with Annex 1.
2.6 Following conditions will result in loss of voting rights of an institute and all of its members at the NGA:
a. Failure of submission of Annual LC/CI Report 2 weeks before the NGA (in accordance with Annex 1).
b. Failure of transfer of Membership fees to the National Treasury by the 10th of each month for consecutive 3 times.
c. Missing three consecutive deadlines for Bimonthly Membership Reports.
2.7 Maintenance of status for a Coordinator Institute (CI): Same as Annex 2.5 a-d 2.8 Mandatory conditions to achieve status of a Candidate LC from a Coordinator Institute:
a. Must be a coordinator college for at least 1 month.
b. Must have at least 30 registered members.
c. Must have a No Objection Certificate (NOC) signed by the head of the institute. The NOC should be according to the sample in Annex 2.
d. Must be structuralized with a cabinet according to the EBTO structure of MSA-Pakistan.
e. Must have at least 70% of positions filled within the cabinet.
2.9 Coordinator's team: a. Every coordinator is urged to select 2 members from the institute within 2 weeks after the announcement of Coordinator's appointment b. These 2 members will be a part of the Coordinator's team and should

preferably be from an year of study

other than the Coordinator's

c. Deadline for submission of

Coordinator's team list is 2 weeks after

the announcement of the Coordinator's

appointment

d. Send the name, year of study, contact

number, and email ID of all members

of the Coordinator's team via email at

vpi@msapakistan.org

cc'd

to

ebto@msapakistan.org.

e. During the selection of the

Coordinator's team, make sure the

appointed team members are active on

WhatsApp, have a good internet

connection, and know how to use

email regularly.

2.11

COORDINATOR'S TOOLKIT FOR

COORDINATOR INSTITUTES

1.

Who is a Coordinator?

A Coordinator of a Coordinator Institute (CI) is a

representative of a non-LC college in

MSA-Pakistan. The coordinator is the most

important person in that college, who plays the

major role of introduction, promotion and

generation of memberships of MSA-Pakistan in

that college and leads the progress of that college

towards becoming an LC.

2.

What are the responsibilities of a

Coordinator?

a. Introduction of MSA-Pakistan within their

institute

b. Advocacy of MSA-Pakistan,, and their

opportunities

c. Generating memberships

d. Sending all members' data and

membership fee of the CI to the EB

e. Work towards establishing an LC in their

colleges

f. Coordinating with, and involving their

faculty and administration.

g. Working as an MSA-Pakistan Leader.

h. Publicizing MSA-Pakistan events in their

college

i. Approving members of their college who

have applied for MSA-Pakistan

opportunities.

3.

Work ethics to be followed by all

Coordinators:

38

a. If somebody contacts externals, always cc

the email to the official email ID of

MSA-Pakistan

(president@msapakistan.org) and VPE

(vpe@msapakistan.org).

b. Response time for email from the

MSA-Pakistan EB is at least 3 working days,

after which the warning will be issued.

c. For the emails marked as URGENT or URG

in the subject, the deadline to respond is

24 hrs.

d. If you have missed 2 meetings

(online/physical), a warning will be issued; if

the person is still unresponsive the person

will be removed from the post 2 weeks

after issuance of the warning.

4.

Coordinators' Email ID

All coordinators receive an official email ID in the

name of the college. MSA-Pakistan VPI will be

providing the official email ID details to the new

appointed coordinators with the following format:

lcabbreviation@msapakistan.org

e.g.

pmcr@msapakistan.org.

5.

What is a Local Council (LC)?

It stands for Local Council; a college that has an

NOC signed by their principal/administration. It

can independently hold MSA-Pakistan events. The

representative of LC is the President.

6.

What is a non-LC college?

It is a college that has not yet obtained an LC

status. A representative of a non-LC college is the

coordinator.\

7.

What is the structure of MSA Pakistan?

TheMedical Students' Associations of Pakistan

MSA Pakistan is a non governmental organization

representing medical students of Pakistan. It was

founded in May 2023. All activities of the MSA

Pakistan are linked to one of its six standing

committees, which are:

a. Standing Committee on Medical

Education (SCOME)

b. Standing Committee on Professional

Exchange (SCOPE)

c. Standing Committee on Research

Exchange (SCORE)

d. Standing Committee on Public Health

(SCOPH)

e. Standing Committee on Sexual &

Reproductive Health including HIV &

AIDS (SCORA)

a. Standing Committee on Human Rights

and Peace (SCORP)

8.

What is a Coordinator's team and its

purpose?

It consists of the Coordinator and his/her

assistants from that college. The Coordinator's

team assists and shares responsibilities. They also

help by promoting MSA-Pakistan in their

respective years of study/batches. In case of

unavailability of a Coordinator to attend a

meeting, their assigned assistant can attend in

their place. Additionally, if a Coordinator graduates

or loses membership then the assistant can take

over as a Coordinator of that respective institute

with approval from MSA-Pakistan EB.

9.

Is it necessary to have a Coordinator's

team?

It is not necessary, but preferable to have a team.

10.

Who can be part of the Coordinator's

team?

Anybody who is a member of MSA Pakistan, is

motivated and has basic knowledge of

MSA-Pakistan. It is better to have assistants from

different years of study/batches so that their

exams do not coincide and assistants can

continue/manage work while the Coordinator

may be busy with exams; assistants from a

different year also ensure greater outreach and

promotion of MSA-Pakistan in different batches.

11.

How many assistants can a Coordinator

have in his/her team? At least two, maximum is

up to you, you can have as many as you want.

12.

If we want one of our Coordinator's

team assistant(s) to be removed, what is the

procedure?

Seek permission from MSA-Pakistan EB and

reason to be emailed to EB for removing a person

from the position with proof. Email the EB

explaining the situation and reason for removing

the person from the post and a suitable step will

be taken by the EB.

13.

Do the Coordinator's team assistants

get certificates or letters of appointment from

MSA-Pakistan?

They get official letters of recognition.

14.

Are the Coordinator's team assistants

supposed to be added to the official

Facebook/WhatsApp Coordinators' groups?

39

No, the group(s) are only for Coordinators. It is the

responsibility of Coordinators to keep their

assistants updated.

15.

What is the procedure for

MSA-Pakistan memberships?

Eligible students may become members on

payment of the prescribed membership fee and

filling the MSA-Pakistan Membership Form

completely and accurately.

16.

How to generate new members? How

to introduce and promote MSA-Pakistan in your

college to students?

a. Make an MSA-Pakistan Instagram

(and/or Facebook) handle for your own

institute.

b. Publicize that page on all forums of the

institute.

c. Share the MSA-Pakistan official

page/group links and encourage

students to like/follow it.

d. Sharing all MSA-Pakistan activities/

events/ posts.

e. Going to every class of every year of

study and conducting a small 5 minute

introductory

presentation

on

MSA-Pakistan.

f. Attending

and

promoting

MSA-Pakistan activities amongst all

members.

17.

How to introduce MSA-Pakistan to your

faculty and administration?

a. Approach faculty members who you

think will be most responsive to

MSA-Pakistan and use their support to

convince the administration.

b. Give them a general idea about

MSA-Pakistan (mention the names of

medical colleges/universities already

involved in MSA-Pakistan).

c. If needed, ask for support material from

the MSA-Pakistan EB.

d. If need arises, any member of the EB

can come and personally talk to the

faculty/administration.

18.

Is it necessary to have a patron for

non-LC colleges from within the faculty?

No, but involvement of an enthusiastic/supportive

faculty member is encouraged.

19.

Is it compulsion that the Community

Medicine Head of Department of my medical

school be our patron?

The patron can be any member of faculty with

influence and who is interested and receptive

towards MSA-Pakistan.

20.

What is the procedure to send the

membership data/forms and membership fee

to the MSA-Pakistan EB?

The membership data/details are to be forwarded

to the VPM regularly. Similarly the respective

membership fee is to be sent to the bank account

of MSA-Pakistan regularly, and the bank receipt

emailed to the VPF. Once the VPF confirms that

he/she has received the membership fees, the

VPM will be issuing the membership letters to the

new members as per the timeline mentioned in

the bylaws

21.

How frequently to forward the

membership details and fee?

Once a month before the 10th of next month.

22.

Is there any amount of membership

money that can be retained in the Coordinator's

team bank account for advocacy?

No, according to theconstitution & bylaws of

MSA-Pakistan all the membership money

generated is to be sent to the MSA-Pakistan bank

account at the earliest. If some amount is required

for the promotion, advocacy, projects or other

activities; a request is sent to the VPA and VPF

explaining the situation, need and budget. The

VPA and VPF will respond accordingly.

23.

Can a non-LC College hold

events/activities under the MSA-Pakistan

banner?

Yes, in some situations we allow them to promote

and advocate MSA-Pakistan to generate new

members.

24.

Can we still hold events

(walks/seminars/consultations/satellite events)

under the umbrella of MSA-Pakistan in our

college if we have a teacher as patron but still

do not have NOC from the college principal?

Yes you can, but for that particular activity you

need permission from the college principal and

also from MSA-Pakistan VPA.

25.

How much time prior to an event must

the activity proposal be sent to the National

VPA for approval?

At least 2 weeks before the commencement date

of the activity.

40

26.

Can non-LC college/CI members attend

MSA-Pakistan events and projects?

Yes, in fact it is highly recommended. Since it

gives you an idea about how MSA-Pakistan

activities are conducted; to avail most

opportunities of MSA-Pakistan; to meet other

MSA-Pakistan members.

27.

What is the procedure/basic steps to

becoming an LC?

a. Promote and advocate MSA-Pakistan in

your college

b. Generate members (Should be at least 30

members)

c. Obtain a NOC (No Objection Certificate)

from the institute's Principal

d. Open call/schedule interviews for the

cabinet of the LC

e. Once all the steps are completed, the

college will obtain the status of a

Candidate LC as approved by the

MSA-Pakistan EB.

28.

What is a No Objection Certificate

(NOC)?

A No Objection Certificate (NOC) is a letter typed

under the institute's official letterhead stating that

the administration of the college has no objection

to their students being involved in MSA-Pakistan,

conducting or engaging in their activities.

29.

Are we only supposed to use a specific

presentation/manual already available for our

meeting with our institute's administration or

can we make our own?

The official presentation/manual is made to help

and facilitate the Coordinators and Presidents.

However there is no compulsion in using the

official presentation/manual. Any Coordinator can

make his/her own presentation as per needs and

requirements but it has to be approved by the

MSA-Pakistan EB.

30.

What are the minimum members

required for a non LC college to be eligible to

become a Candidate LC?

At least 30 registered members

31.

How is the MSA-Pakistan Executive

Board involved in helping a Coordinator

Institute upgrade to a Candidate Local Council?

a. Providing material/resources for advocacy

and promotion of MSA-Pakistan

b. Providing official documents/letters and

any other material required by the

institute's administration

c. Being available to talk to the institute's

administration on behalf of the

Coordinator, if the administration is not

receptive towards MSA-Pakistan.

32.

Which is better, to work toward

formation of LC first and then start

memberships and participation in other

MSA-Pakistan activities or vice versa?

Ideally the recommended procedure is to start

membership drive, and once you have enough

members to start working towards formation of a

Local Council.

33.

When

does

a

non-LC

institute/Coordinator Institute get an LC status?

Coordinator Institute gets a Candidate LC status

as soon as the aforementioned criteria is fulfilled

and the MSA-Pakistan EB approves the

upgradation. An institute can obtain Temporary

LC status at the next NGA and a Permanent LC

status ONE year after attaining Temporary LC

status, i.e. during the NGA following the NGA in

which they got upgraded to Temporary LC status.

2.12 SAMPLE NO OBJECTION CERTIFICATE (NOC)

Dated: DD/MM/YYYY

[Your Institute's Letterhead]

[Institute Name] [Institute Address] [City, State, ZIP Code] [Date]

To Whom It May Concern,

Subject: No Objection Certificate (NOC) for MSA-Pakistan

This is to certify that MSA-Pakistan, represented by [National President Name] (National President MSA-Pakistan), has been granted permission to collaborate and work with and within [Institute Name here]. The purpose of this collaboration is to engage in mutually beneficial activities, including

41

but not limited to research projects, workshops, seminars, and any other academic or professional initiatives.
We are confident in the capabilities and intentions of MSA-Pakistan and believe that this collaboration will contribute positively to the academic and professional development of both parties involved. The activities conducted under this collaboration will be in line with the values and objectives of [Your Institute Name here].
The NOC is subject to adherence to all relevant laws and regulations, as well as the policies and guidelines set forth by [Institute Name here]. Any deviation from the agreed-upon terms may result in the termination of this NOC.
We appreciate the commitment of MSA-Pakistan to academic excellence and look forward to a fruitful association. We believe that this collaboration will create opportunities for knowledge exchange and contribute to the advancement of education and research.
This No Objection Certificate (NOC) is issued upon the request of [National President Name] (National President MSA-Pakistan).
Sincerely,
[Principal/Dean/VC Name/Registrar] [Designation] [Institute Name] [Signature]
[Seal of the Institute]
2.13 SAMPLE LETTER OF SUPPORT (LOS)
Dated: DD/MM/YYYY
To whom it may concern,
I am writing to you on behalf of [Medical School Name] to provide

clarification on the current status and level of activity of the Medical Students' Association of Pakistan (MSA-Pakistan). As you may be aware, the MSA-Pakistan at [Medical School Name] is a dynamic and active group of students who are passionate about advancing the interests of medical students, global health and promoting the well-being of patients. Our organization is dedicated to fostering a sense of community and engagement among medical students, while also providing opportunities for professional development, advocacy, and leadership. In terms of our current status, I am pleased to report that MSA-Pakistan at [Medical School Name] is flourishing. We have a robust membership base, with active participation from students across all years of study. The organization has been particularly active in recent months, with a number of successful events and initiatives that have helped to promote our mission and goals.
Some of our recent activities include [list examples of recent events and initiatives, such as guest speaker events, community service projects, fundraisers, etc.]. We have also been actively involved in advocacy efforts related to [mention specific issues or causes that the organization has been involved in advocating for]. In summary, I want to emphasize that MSA-Pakistan at [Medical School Name] is a vital and active part of our community, and we are proud of the contributions that our members have made to the school and the broader community. If you have any further questions or would like more information about our organization, please do not hesitate to reach out to me.
Thank you for your time and attention. Sincerely, [Your Name] [Medical School Name]

42

3. Procedure for MSA-Pakistan EBTO Elections 3.1. General :
i) MSA-Pakistan EBTO elections will be organized at the National General Assembly by the Election Commission Board.
ii) Election Commission Board (ECB) will constitute of member(s) of the MSA-Pakistan EBTO who will not be a candidate along with the National VPM (if the VPM is not a candidate).
iii) Each candidate will present their candidature on the 2nd day of the NGA according to the constitution & bylaws. EB debate will be done on the 3rd day of the NGA before the voting procedure begins.
iv) The questions for EB debate will be collected in a box and asked by the Plenary Chair to the candidates.
3.2. Voting Procedure: 3.2.1. Procedure
i) The voting for MSA-Pakistan EBTO elections will be done by ballot (paper or online portal).
ii) The voters list will be made public by the CCC according to the CCC forms filled by the LCs and Coordinator Institutes.
iii) The Returning Officers of the Plenary Team will have a full list of the voters.
iv) In case of elections by paper, three (3) ballot boxes of three different colors will be placed in the center of the voting room.
v) White box for SupCo candidate vi) Blue box for Executive Board candidates vii) Green box for Team of Officials candidates viii) Three (3) ballot papers of similar colors will
be made by the ECB & VPM. ix) Three (3) booths, covered from 3 sides &
open from one, will be made inside the voting room. x) Secrete stamps will be made by the ECB & VPM. xi) Returning Officer(s) will be sitting outside the voting room. xii) Each Returning Officer will have a specific number of voters. xiii) At a time three people will cast votes. xiv) Voters will 1st visit the Returning Officer's table & will be checked for ID, & will sign

ANNEX 3
against his name & receive his ballot papers with signatures of the ECB. xv) Three (3) voters will enter the room from one end & each will be guided to a booth by the Returning Officer inside the room. xvi) The voters will cast votes & fold the ballot paper to keep the secrecy. xvii) The ballot papers will be added to respective ballot boxes. xviii) The voters will leave & will be marked by ink on their exit from the voting room. xix) The above mentioned procedure will continue till everyone has casted the votes. xx) The Returning Officers will count the votes in the presence of ECB and Plenary Chair & submit the numbers to the Plenary Chair. xxi) Official results would be announced by the Plenary Chair during the last Plenary Session at the NGA. xxii) All the elected candidates would accept their position when asked by the Plenary Chair during the Plenary Session at the time of announcement. 3.2.2. Announcement would not state in any way to ridicule any member of the organization. The announcement would read: "After counting of the votes, Mr. /Miss ______ has been elected with _____ majority to officially serve MSA-Pakistan as _______ for the term _____ on a voluntary basis." 3.2.3. The voting results would be announced and displayed on board in the last Plenary Session. 3.2.4. Before the end of the last Plenary Session, the newly elected President would take the oath from the newly elected MSA-Pakistan Executive Board and Team of Officials.

3.2.5.

The Oath

"I, (name), solemnly declare to abide by the

constitution & bylaws of MSA-Pakistan and the

laws of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan. I

pledge not to engage in or promote actions

that could harm or undermine MSA-Pakistan,

nor to allow others to use my position or name

against the organization or the country. I will

refrain from participating in any political or

lobbying activities that conflict with the values

and interests of MSA-Pakistan.

43
ANNEX 4 MOTION AND DEBATE MAZE

5. Candidate

ANNEX 5

5.1. Candidature Guidelines: For your application to be considered complete AND valid, make sure you have submitted all the following documents according to the guidelines: a) Application Form (template shall be provide) contain Curriculum Vitae (CV) Plan of Action (PoA) Motivational Letter (ML) b) Candidature form signed by LC-President c) Proof of enrollment d) Copy of CNIC or Passport (1st Page) e) Evidence of certain CV items (preferably in English) including: i) Positions held in the NMO ii) Research related experience (if any) iii) letters of recommendation from supervisors or references to publications authored iv) Internships (if any), v) letter of recommendation or similar from the supervisors vi) Activities'/projects' participation or coordination certificates

5.2. Guidelines for Candidates: 5.2.1. Documents as mentioned in 5.1 should be submitted through a designated online form with Application form
(Contain CV, Motivation letter, and Plan of Action), Technical Datacard, Proof of enrolment, and Credential page of

44
Passport or Both Side of CNIC and sending All submitted documents via email at vpm@msapakistan.org cc'd to president@msapakistan.org, ecb@msapakistan.org, and plenary@msapakistan.org according to the set deadline in the official call for the EBTO
5.2.2. Candidature format should be as follows: One PDF file containing the documents mentioned in 5.1 in the same order.Plan of Action (PoA) will be made public with the rest of the candidature. It should be as realistic as it could be, with the explanation of all the possible questions that could be raised beforehand e.g. how are you going to achieve a specific goal mentioned in your plan of action?
5.2.3. Curriculum Vitae (CV) should not exceed the length of two pages. The certificates and any documents that could provide proof for items mentioned in your CV must be attached with the candidature. The CV must include your biodate including your contact details, address, and institute of study.
5.2.4. Note the following as the template for the Candidature:
5.3. Campaigning: 5.3.1. The campaign will consist of the Motivational Letter (ML) addressed to the MSA-Pakistan members, which will be
made public as a part of the candidature. Apart from that the candidatures which will be approved by the Constitution Credential Committee (CCC), will be open to discussion.
5.4. Voting Procedure: 5.4.1. Elections will take place on the 3rd day of the NGA. Each voter will cast his/her ballot in a box at a polling station
(specified location) or through electronic, online mode.
5.5. Criteria For EBTO of MSA-Pakistan: 5.5.1. Same as mentioned in bylaws § 13.3-13.8 5.5.2. NOTE: Only those members can apply for MSA-Pakistan EBTO who belong to official Local Councils of
MSA-Pakistan. 5.5.3. MSA-Pakistan EB has the right to disqualify your applications if the above mentioned instructions for candidatures
are not taken into account while submission. 5.5.4. The Election Commission Board (ECB) will email you about missing documents if any. All candidates have to
submit all documents within the deadline. 5.5.5. ECB will consider the time stamp of the candidature form submission time as the final time of submission. 5.5.6. Late applicants will not be facilitated and will automatically be disqualified by the CCC.
5.6. Tasks of MSA-Pakistan Executive Board & Team of Officials: 5.6.1. Same as mentioned in bylaws § 10.1-10.9
ANNEX 6 6.R ules and Regulations for NGA Host Candidature
6.1. The candidature(s) for NGA Host will have to be approved by the MSA-Pakistan EB. 6.2. The call for the NGA Hosts of the next NGA will be opened one month before NGA among LCs and relevant
candidatures along with the business plans must be submitted to the MSA-Pakistan Executive Board at least 2 weeks before the NGA. 6.3. MSA-Pakistan Executive Board will evaluate the business plan and will approve or disapprove a candidature accordingly. 6.4. A Demand Document will be sent by the MSA-Pakistan EB to the NGA Host candidates, according to which the business plan will be made.

45

6.5. The Demand Document should state the logistical requirements and set guidelines for the NGA. Sample Demand Document is as follows:

"MSA-Pakistan National General Assembly Requirements" Logistical Requirements for NGA:
a) Participants Cap: xxx-xxx (inclusive of MSA-Pakistan EBTO & SupCo) b) Rooms: (NGA) c) Auditorium d) x Rooms for Sessions (ideally spacious, with moveable chairs) e) x Room for session (Ideally conference room but any would work) Rooms: (PreNGA) f) x Rooms (Spacious with moveable chairs) (workshops) g) Stationary: as per demand from the sessions teams h) Accommodation: for xxx students in total (this number is changeable depending upon the registrations) 6.6. Transport: a) to and from the accommodation b) to and from the social events venue c) Events dependent on OC: d) Social Dinner (1st day) e) Fun event (2nd day) f) Farewell event (3rd day) g) Activities Fair (VPA + OC) 6.7. Merchandise: MSA-Pakistan EB along with OC will be responsible for merchandise. 6.7.1. Registrations will be supervised by the national VPM or a person delegated by the national VPM. 6.7.2. The Treasury will be supervised by the national VPF or a person delegated by the national VPF. 6.7.3. Public Relations will be supervised by VPPRC or a person delegated by VPPRC for support. 6.7.4. VPPRC will help with the formation of the NGA Invitation Package. 6.7.5. Requirements for budget: a) Registration fee:
i. For general members: PKR XXXX ii. For OC: PKR XXXX iii. For MSA-Pakistan EB & SupCo: PKR XXXX iv. For MSA-Pakistan TO: PKR XXXX v. For Plenary Team: PKR XXXX vi. For MSA-Pakistan Alumni: PKR XXXX vii. For guests/other invitees: PKR XXXX 6.7.6. No extravagant funds will be facilitated at any cost. Note: National VPF will be available for any support and queries regarding budget. 6.7.7. Proposal (proposed details of logistical execution with expected issues) along with budget (should mention any possible external means of income) should be formulated according to the aforementioned guidelines and submitted to MSA-Pakistan Executive Board. 6.7.8. Business Plan should mention the following details: a) Tentative budget with details of approximate incomes and expenditures b) Logistical details c) Possible difficulties
ANNEX 7
Acronyms and Abbreviation

i.MSAP: Medical Students' Association of Pakistan  EB: Executive Board ii.EBTO: Executive Board & Team of Officials

iii.EBTOM: Executive Board & Team of Officials Meeting
iv.E BM: Executive Board Meeting

46

v.T OM: Team of Officials Meeting vi.O LM: Online Meeting vii.HLM: Honorary Life Member viii.IL: Invitation Letter ix.L C: Local Council x.CI: Coordinator Institute xi.LOME: Local Officer for Medical Education
(SCOME) xii.LORA: Local Officer of Sexual & Reproductive
Health including HIV & AIDS (SCORA) xiii.L ORE: Local Office on Research Exchange
(SCORE) xiv.LORP: Local Officer on Rights and Peace (SCORP) xv.L PO: Local Public Health Officer (SCOPH) xvi.L EO: Local Exchange Officer (SCOPE) xvii.SDG: Sustainable Development Goal of the United
Nations xviii.M SI: Medical Student International
xix.NEO: National Exchange Officer (SCOPE) xx.NGO: Non-Governmental organization xxi.N MO: National Member organization xxii.S COME: Standing Committee on Medical
Education xxiii.S CORA: Standing Committee on Sexual and
Reproductive Health including HIV & AIDs xxiv.SCOPE: Standing Committee on Professional
Exchange xxv.SCORE: Standing Committee on Research
Exchange xxvi.SCORP: Standing Committee on Human Rights
and Peace

xxvii.S COPH: Standing Committee on Public Health xxviii.P RC: Public Relations and Communication
xxix.TF: Task Force xxx.S WG: Small working Group xxxi.SC: Standing Committee xxxii.OC: Organizing Committee xxxiii.A C: Activity Coordinator xxxiv.VPI: Vice President for Internal Affairs xxxv.VPE: Vice President for External Affairs xxxvi.VPM: Vice President for Members xxxvii.V PCB: Vice President for Capacity Building xxxviii.VPA: Vice President for Activities xxxix.VPF: Vice President for Finances
xl.VPPRC: Vice President for Public Relations and Communication
xli.NOME: National Officer on Medical Education (SCOME)
xlii.N ORA: National Officer on Sexual & Reproductive Health including HIV & AIDS (SCORA)
xliii.N ORE: National Officer on Research Exchange (SCORE)
xliv.N ORP: National Officer on Rights and Peace (SCORP)
xlv.N PO: National Public Health Officer (SCOPH) xlvi.NEO: National Exchange Officer (SCOPE) xlvii.OP : Online Plenaries xlviii.GA : General Assembly xlix.O GA : Online General Assembly
l.S GA : Special General Assembly

47
History
1. Adoption of 1st Constitutional Bylaws 1st May 2023 2.Amended on 22nd September 2024 1st NGA Rashid Latif Medical College Lahore 3.Amended on 6th September 2025 2nd NGA Shifa College of Medicine Islamabad (Current)

